In the 16th century, the Europeans would
sail to the Indian subcontinent in a
race for riches, first seizing trade
routes, then the land itself.
By the 1800s, the British would control
most of the subcontinent, exploiting
India's wealth and ruling it as the
crown jewel of their empire.
But, there were already thriving peoples
here with civilizations and history
stretching back thousands of years.
These empires were among the most
powerful the world had ever seen. From
humanity's most magnificent cities and
monuments to some of the most peaceful
and enlightened cultures in human
history. The Indians were pioneers of
knowledge in advancing mathematics,
charting the movements of the planets,
and offering the world unique
philosophies.
India withstood the ancient era, the
Middle Ages, and now the modern period.
With a rising population of over 1
billion people and increased tension
from their neighbors, can they continue
on?
To understand this fascinating land, we
must start from the beginning.
[Music]
For many scholars, it begins with a
history of Adivasi.
The Adivasi are the ancient native
peoples of India who had lived on the
subcontinent for anywhere up to 30,000
years.
[Music]
These tribes inhabited India as nomads
and semi-nomad long before anyone else.
They left behind very little
archaeological evidence, and what
history they have survived orally in
their modern descendants.
[Applause]
Then came the first major settled
civilization in India, the Indus River
Valley Civilization.
[Music]
The Indus Valley Civilization emerged in
the late 4th millennium BC along the
Indus River.
They were one of the first great urban
societies on the planet. But, despite
existing at the same time as other
civilizations in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and
China, comparatively little is known
about them.
The Indus Valley Civilization was an
urban culture that thrived along the
river for about 2,000 years, reaching
its height around 2600 BC and declining
after 1900 BC.
[Music]
At one point, it might have been home to
up to 5 million people living in
hundreds of cities and towns.
Excavations at major sites like Harappa
and Mohenjo-Daro, both of which are in
modern-day Pakistan, show a complex
urban culture with stone architecture,
planned cities, and complex
infrastructure.
[Music]
The Indus Valley Civilization relied on
monsoon agriculture to feed themselves,
and they also had a sewage system and
public baths that would not be matched
elsewhere in the world for over a
thousand years.
Evidence shows that the Indus Valley
Civilization was engaged in trade with
documents and seals used by merchants,
along with settlement walls to control
entry and exit to towns, suggesting a
developed merchant culture.
From their graves, we know that they
believed in some sort of afterlife, and
differences between the graves show some
kind of wealth-based social hierarchy.
However, we still cannot decipher the
writings from this civilization. As a
result, although we can now point to
hundreds of Indus Valley Civilization
sites, so much of their lives and
society are lost to us. Despite all
their achievements, we cannot even name
a single person who lived in this
civilization for its 2,000-year-long
history.
[Music]
What caused the fall of the Indus Valley
Civilization? Firstly, the Indus Valley
Civilization didn't fall at a single
decisive moment.
It appears to have gradually petered out
over centuries between about 1900 BC and
1300 BC.
The most likely explanation is climate.
After 1800 BC, the climate of the Indus
region became cooler and drier, which
affected the monsoons and made it harder
to practice the agriculture needed for
these large cities.
Earthquakes also caused the course of
the Indus River to shift westward over
time, which deprived cities of their
vital water source.
Their cities declined, but the Indus
Valley people themselves didn't
necessarily die with them. Most scholars
believe the Indus people migrated
southeast deeper into the subcontinent.
One theory holds that the Dravidian
language family, which is spoken mostly
in Southeast India and includes Telugu,
Tamil, and Kannada, originally came from
these Indus Valley migrants.
With the decline of the Indus Valley
Civilization, a third group of people
enter our story, and it's these people
that most Indians see as their ancient
predecessors, the Vedic peoples.
[Music]
The Vedic people appear to have hailed
from Central Asia and began migrating
into northwestern India in around 1500
BC.
They called themselves Arya and are
sometimes called the Indo-Aryans.
Initially, they were nomadic peoples,
but over time, they settled in India in
villages and small towns. By 1200 BC,
the Vedic peoples had crossed the Ganges
River and began penetrating deeper into
central and eastern India.
The Vedic people brought the
domestication of the horse to India.
First domesticated by Indo-European
peoples around 2200 BC, horses served as
pack animals to help in their migrations
and pulled chariots, which were
characteristic of Vedic warfare.
They also brought their own language in
Vedic Sanskrit. The Vedas are a
collection of dense, complicated, and
beloved religious texts that are still
in use today. There are four Vedas. The
oldest, longest, and most well-known is
the Rigveda. There's also the Yajurveda,
Samaveda, and the Atharvaveda.
The Vedas were the earliest sacred texts
of India, composed around 1500 BC,
forming the foundation of Indian
philosophy, ritual, and spiritual
thought.
[Music]
As for what that society looked like,
Vedic people began as semi-nomadic
tribal pastoralists and practiced that
lifestyle in India for the first few
centuries. Initially, they were
concentrated in the Punjab and northwest
India before gradually moving down and
settling in the regions fed by the
Ganges and Yamuna rivers. Tribes could
settle into semi-permanent villages,
while others spent all or most of their
time living nomadically.
These tribes engaged in trade,
diplomacy, raiding, and warfare with one
another, which aligned with their shared
warrior culture. Two of the most
important tribes were the Purus and
Bharatas.
The arrival of iron working to India
after 1200 BC enabled the Vedic peoples
to tame the thick forests and jungles
that dominated much of the continent and
encouraged them to make more permanent
settlements.
This led the Vedic people to gradually
abandon their nomadic lifestyle for more
permanent settlement in small
agricultural communities, although
nothing so large that it could be called
a city.
As Vedic society developed, its social
structure changed, too.
Initially, the primary social division
in Vedic India was between warriors and
non-warriors, but in time, a new social
structure emerged, dubbed Varna, also
known as the caste system.
The Purusha Sukta of the Rigveda
describes the Varna system in terms of
the body. At the top, representing the
head, there are the Brahmins. The
Brahmins are the priestly class of
India, responsible for studying,
understanding, and educating on
religious texts. All classes owed them
reverence and respect, and kings
throughout Indian history were expected
to patronize and care for them. Below
them, representing the hands and arms,
were the Kshatriyas. The Kshatriya class
is usually translated as warriors, and
that's fairly accurate. The Kshatriya
class also included kings, nobles, and
even administrators. Essentially, anyone
who ruled or exercised power over
others, showing the close ties between
violence and authority that underpinned
most societies in this period. For the
thighs, we have the third Varna,
Vaishya. Vaishya are mostly farmers,
animal husbandmen, merchants, and
businessmen. More specifically, it
referred to land-owning farmers rather
than just anyone who worked in the
fields. And pretty much anyone who might
employ another person to work for them
could be a Vaishya, which brings us to
the feet of the Varna system as
described in the Purusha Sukta, the
Shudra. Shudra is generally translated
as laborer or sometimes peasant, and
referred to most people in society.
These people tilled the soil owned by
the Vaishya, crafted the weapons wielded
by the Kshatriya, or swept the floors
walked by the Brahmins. Overall, their
job was to serve the other three Varna.
[Applause]
Further south, the Deccan Plateau saw
its share of cultures known only from
archaeological remains. For example, the
Jorwe culture in modern-day Maharashtra
lasted for some 700 years between 1400
and 700 BC.
One peculiarity about Jorwe culture is
that they seem to have been fascinated
with cutting bits off people. Almost
every discovered body had their feet cut
off before being buried, and multiple
artifacts show Jorwe gods as being
headless. Archaeologists are still
puzzled as to what these things mean.
Although the legacy of these people
isn't as obvious, and their stories have
been lost, they are every bit a part of
the history of India as the Vedic
peoples they lived alongside.
[Music]
The Vedic period ran for about a
thousand years until the 6th or 7th
centuries BC. There is no single event
that ends the Vedic period, but a
combination of cultural, religious, and
social factors marked a new period
distinct from the one that came before.
From around 700 to 600 BC, cities began
to form in large numbers for the first
time since the days of the Indus Valley
Civilization.
These cities became the centers of power
for a new type of political unit, the
Janapadas.
Janapadas were essentially city-states
or townships, and over time they were
consolidated into larger Mahajanapadas,
which might be considered kingdoms or
even minor empires. There were 16 of
these Mahajanapadas. Some of the most
notable ones include Kuru, evolving from
the Kuru kingdom, Vajji on the sites of
modern-day Bihar, and Magadha.
More importantly, these cities provided
a place for new intellectual, cultural,
and spiritual developments that would
transform India. This period is known
for the birth of several of the world's
oldest and most important religions.
[Music]
Jainism emerged in the 6th century BC
due to the actions of the ascetic monk
Mahavira.
[Music]
Mahavira was a prince in eastern India
who left his life of luxury behind at
age 30 to pursue the harsh ascetic life.
After 12 years of meditation and
reflection, he achieved what Jains call
Kevala Jnana, a sort of transcendence or
omniscience.
In doing so, he became a Tirthankara,
one who has created a way to transcend
the endless cycle of birth, death, and
rebirth known as Samsara.
According to Jain tradition, he amassed
some 50,000 followers before his death
in the 520s BC. Jainism continued to
find adherents across India and still
has millions of followers today. Jains
believe that Jainism has always existed
in the endless cycle of time, and the
first Tirthankara of the cycle, named
Rishabhanatha, actually existed millions
of years ago. Jainism calls for its
followers to obey five important vows.
They must always tell the truth, they
must never steal, they must practice
chastity if not outright celibacy, they
must avoid greed and possessiveness, and
last but not least, they must practice
total non-violence. This non-violence
ideal, known as Ahimsa, symbolized by
the iconic open palm, is probably the
most famous part of Jainism.
Jains and non-Jains have used its ideas,
especially that of non-violence, to
shape Indian history ever since.
The second of the major religious
developments was Buddhism.
The Buddha, born Siddhartha Gautama, was
a prince of the Shakya clan in the
Himalayas.
And according to Buddhist tradition, led
a perfectly sheltered life for 30 years.
It was only then that he stepped outside
and witnessed the truth of the world.
According to the story, Siddhartha first
encountered an elderly man. Having been
raised in the palace and never laying
eyes upon old age, Siddhartha was
shocked to learn that all men would grow
old. Next, he encountered a sick man and
learned that all men were vulnerable to
disease and pain. Last, Siddhartha laid
his eyes upon a dead body and learned
that all men would eventually die. These
experiences shattered Siddhartha's
sheltered delusions and made him realize
that suffering was inevitable in life.
However, when he saw an ascetic monk, he
learned that one could live a virtuous
life and potentially escape the
seemingly endless suffering of life.
Siddhartha became an ascetic and
embarked on a spiritual journey. He
attempted several methods towards
enlightenment before deciding to sit
underneath a Bodhi tree in modern-day
Bihar and meditate for 49 days. By doing
so, the Buddha achieved Nirvana, the
complete elimination of desire that
untethered him from the endless cycle of
Samsara.
[Music]
The Buddha spent the rest of his life
traveling and preaching his philosophy.
So, what did the Buddha actually preach?
The Four Noble Truths are the basis of
the Buddhist religion. There is
suffering, this suffering has a cause,
this suffering has an end, and the way
to teach that end is the Eightfold Path.
The Eightfold Path is the basic rules of
conduct that all Buddhists should
follow. Those being right view, right
intention, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right concentration. He
called for Buddhists to walk the middle
path between extreme indulgence and
extreme restraint, which was much more
reasonable for the average person than
life as a total ascetic. Emerging from
the same culture and time period,
Buddhism shares much with Jain and later
Hindu beliefs. The concepts of karma and
reincarnation are shared among all of
them, and Buddhism also shares Jainism's
strict rejection of violence. Buddhism
is one of the oldest continuously
practiced religions and still has
millions of adherents.
While it would shape Indian history over
the coming centuries and remains highly
respected in India, over time it would
migrate out of the subcontinent and
almost die in its birthplace while
finding a new lease of life in East and
Southeast Asia.
There were 16 Mahajanapadas throughout
the region. However, the centerpiece of
this development was the Magadha region,
which became the cradle of India's first
great empires.
King of Magadha, Bimbisara, started the
Haryanka dynasty in 454 BC after
annexing the kingdom of Anga, one of the
other Mahajanapadas.
There were a few reasons why the Magadha
region was so productive for empires.
Firstly, the environment was perfect for
rice agriculture.
[Music]
This meant large food surpluses for
non-farming occupations like blacksmiths
and merchants.
And stable farming meant a stable tax
base for local rulers. Taxes and extra
food meant that Magadha could raise
larger armies than their rivals. The
region also had good access to iron for
tools and weaponry for that army.
And the area was home to elephants,
which were a prominent feature of Indian
warfare.
Bimbisara was known as a wise and
ambitious king who had even met Prince
Siddhartha before he became the Buddha,
becoming one of his greatest supporters
after the Buddha attained enlightenment.
However, his life would drastically
change as his son, Ajatashatru, would be
influenced by Buddha's cousin and rival
Devadatta to betray his father and
become king.
At around 493 BC, Bimbisara was captured
in jail and assassinated by his own son
for the throne.
After Bimbisara's death, Ajatashatru
regretted his actions, especially after
learning that he had just become a
father himself. He later became a
follower of the Buddha and sought
redemption.
Ajatashatru later conquered Vaishali,
Kashi, and Kosala and expanded the
Haryanka dynasty.
After him, his son, Udayabhadra, also
continued his reign and developed the
foundation of Pataliputra to convert it
into a full-fledged city. After
Udayabhadra, more rulers ruled after the
Haryanka dynasty. The last ruler,
Nagadasaka, took the throne after
murdering his father and ruled for 24
years until 413 BC when the people of
Magadha revolted against the Haryanka
dynasty's rule and Shishunaga was placed
on the throne.
[Music]
Shishunaga, 413 BC to 395 BC, was a
viceroy during the Haryankas and was the
son of the ruler of Vaishali.
The people chose him to rule, and he
quickly recruited his son to rule
Varanasi, and he himself would rule
Rajagriha.
Shishunaga later conquered the Avanti
region of the Pradyota dynasty. He was
succeeded by his son, Kalashoka, in 395
BC. Kalashoka continued his father's
work of consolidating the kingdom and
later divided the kingdom among his 10
sons. However, this was the last
generation the Shishunaga dynasty would
exist as the last king, Mahanandin, was
killed by his father's illegitimate son,
Mahapadma Nanda, in the year of 345 BC,
forming the short-lived Nanda dynasty,
which wouldn't last all that long, but
it clung on just long enough to see the
arrival of an outsider to India in the
form of Alexander the Great.
Alexander the Great entered India in 326
BC after conquering the Persian Empire.
He entered the Punjab and entered the
Jhelum River, known to the Greeks as the
Hydaspes, where he met an Indian king
identified in Greek sources as Porus.
In May 326 BC, Porus marched his armies
to meet Alexander at the Hydaspes. In
the resulting battle, Porus's men fought
well, but Alexander's forces proved more
capable and managed to encircle and
slaughter most of his army. Porus
himself was injured and ultimately
captured.
However, Alexander was impressed by
Porus's fighting spirit and decided not
only to keep him in power, but cooperate
with him as he moved deeper into India.
Porus accepted and his armies marched
with Alexander eastwards, capturing the
city of Sangala together later that
year. Alexander's conquest stopped at
the Beas River, known as the Hyphasis to
the Greeks, later that same year.
His exhausted army forced the conqueror
to turn back and leave India. This
decision was also made because of
stories that another, much larger
empire, probably the Nanda Empire,
awaited in the east with 200,000 men,
tens of thousands of cavalry, and
thousands of war elephants. Porus was
left in charge of Alexander's conquered
territory east of the Jhelum Hydaspes
River, but according to Greek sources,
he was killed by a rival Greek general a
few years after Alexander's death. Porus
did not live to take advantage of the
opportunities Alexander's death created,
but another ruler and another empire was
about to emerge to seize power and rise
to heights never before seen in India.
In 320 BC, the Nanda Empire was
overthrown by an ambitious man named
Chandragupta Maurya. Sources disagree on
Chandragupta's origins. Some describe
him as the son of the previous king,
while others suggest he was from a
family of peacock farmers. We also don't
know how exactly he overthrew the Nanda,
although some sources credit his advisor
and spymaster Kautilya for helping him
do so.
Chandragupta rapidly seized power and
began pushing the borders of his new
Mauryan Empire west. Over the following
years, he seized control of the areas
India once held by Alexander, which led
him into conflict with the Seleucid
Empire.
This confrontation between one of
India's greatest empires and the largest
of Alexander's successors is one of
history's great lost wars.
It's mentioned offhandedly by a few
Greek authors, but we don't know
anything about how it played out. What
we do know is that Chandragupta won and
took all of the territory Alexander had
conquered in the Indus Valley and into
Afghanistan.
And in exchange, he gave 500 war
elephants to his Greek foes and probably
married one of Emperor Seleucus's
daughters.
This encounter with the Greeks led to a
visit by the Seleucid ambassador
Megasthenes, who gives us the only real
account of Chandragupta's capital city
at Pataliputra. Megasthenes tells us
that the grand city was surrounded by 21
miles of walls with almost 600 towers
and 60 gates.
He describes the high position of
Brahmins in Chandragupta's court and his
system of food distribution where
farmers gave a quarter of their crop to
the state, which Chandragupta could use
to feed his armies. What we do know is
that Chandragupta and his son Bindusara
pushed the borders of the empire to
almost the entirety of India. By doing
so, the Mauryan Empire became the first
state to unify most of India under a
single power. The only regions that
weren't conquered were the Kalinga
region, modern-day Odisha, and some
parts of northern Andhra Pradesh.
[Music]
The empire reached its greatest height
under the rule of Chandragupta's
grandson Ashoka the Great. Ashoka began
his reign by playing to the military
might of the Mauryan Empire. He led a
campaign against the state of Kalinga in
the east that supposedly led to the
deaths of almost 250,000
people. Seeing this destruction changed
Ashoka. He was horrified at the
bloodshed and his own role in it.
And after 261 BC, he swore off war
altogether and dedicated himself
absolutely to Buddhism and the ideals of
non-violence.
This brought an end to the Mauryan
conquest phase and Ashoka spent the rest
of his reign regretting his past
violence and working to be a devout
Buddhist ruler.
[Music]
Ashoka raised pillars inscribed with his
edicts across his empire, which provide
us with a wealth of information on his
reign.
Of course, these edicts trumpet his
achievements, but he also uses them to
confess his past sins and explain how he
will atone for them.
He describes establishing hospitals and
wells for the common people and
patronizing Buddhist temples. In one
inscription, he describes how he ordered
banyan trees to be planted along the
roads so travelers could have shade.
He also made a pilgrimage to the Bodhi
tree and ordered the first temples to be
built where the Mahabodhi Temple now
stands.
Ashoka is one of the most popular Indian
historical figures and it's easy to see
why. Not only was he a good ruler who
provided for his people, but he was a
good person who recognized his own
mistakes and dedicated his life to
correcting them.
Ashoka would have four official sons and
one daughter from his multiple wives.
His first son would become a Buddhist
monk revoking his right to the throne,
so his second son, Kunala, became the
crowned prince. However, one of Ashoka's
wives, Queen Tishyaraksha, had become
jealous of Kunala's influence and
intelligence, secretly plotting to have
him blinded. One day, the queen forged a
royal order from Ashoka instructing
officials in Taxila to blind the prince.
Soon after, the prince's eyes were
gouged out,
[Music]
disqualifying him from becoming king as
he couldn't lead an army anymore.
The son of Kunala and grandson of
Ashoka, Samprati, was considered the
next successor. However, he was just a
baby. King Ashoka the Great died in 232
BC, but Samprati was still too young,
leaving Ashoka's other grandson,
Dasaratha Maurya, to take the throne
from 232 to 224 BC.
After the death of Dasaratha, Samprati
took the throne of the Maurya Dynasty
from 224 BC to 215 BC. However, since
the death of Ashoka, the empire had
become much weaker due to its large size
and its non-violence policy.
After Samprati's death, four more
emperors ruled the Mauryan Empire.
Around 185 BC, the last emperor was
assassinated by Pushyamitra Shunga, one
of his own generals who went on to
establish the Shunga Empire. What
remained of the Mauryan Empire
fragmented and no empire would unify
most of India again for centuries.
[Music]
The Shunga Empire was established in
Magadha by Pushyamitra Shunga, ruled for
36 years,
and was succeeded by his son, Agnimitra,
149 BC to 141 BC. There were 10 Shunga
rulers. However, after the death of
Agnimitra, the second king of the
dynasty, the empire rapidly
disintegrated. This was mostly due to
the constant fighting and wars.
The Shunga fought the Kalinga, the
Panchalas, and the Indo-Greek kingdom in
the Shunga-Greek War after Greek king
Demetrius took over the Kabul Valley and
wanted to invade further into the
subcontinent. After Agnimitra, there
were a total of four kings from 141 BC
to 73 BC. And Devabhuti, the last Shunga
emperor, was assassinated by his
minister, Vasudeva Kanva, who thereafter
established his Kanva Dynasty, 73 BC to
28 BC.
[Music]
The 500 years following the collapse of
the Mauryan Empire in 185 BC has been
described as a dark age.
The already sparse historical record
dried up yet again with entire kingdoms
rising and falling without leaving
enough information.
What we do have doesn't paint a rosy
picture. India split into numerous small
kingdoms once again and faced waves of
foreign incursions. The first of these
came within a few years of the Mauryan
collapse when Greek invaders from the
Central Asian kingdom of Bactria
conquered much of northern India and
even sacked the old Mauryan capital of
Pataliputra. The Greeks withdrew after a
while, but after them, waves of
Scythians, known as the Saka, invaded,
conquering much of northwest India and
modern Pakistan before they were
conquered themselves by yet another
Central Asian migratory group, the
Yuezhi. The Yuezhi later founded the
Kushan kingdom, one of the most powerful
contemporary dynasties with the help of
Kujula Kadphises in 25 AD along with the
Satavahana Empire.
The Kushan kingdom dominated modern-day
Pakistan, Punjab, and Afghanistan, but
despite their foreign origins, they
proved quite beneficial to native Indian
culture. Their emperors were patrons and
eventually converts to Hinduism and they
grew rich and powerful from the Indian
Ocean trade going through their ports.
The Kushan Empire probably became the
first major Indian state to meet a
Chinese army on the battlefield with the
forces of Emperor Kanishka encountering
the army of General Ban Chao somewhere
in Central Asia, which Kanishka
apparently lost and was forced to pay
tribute to the Chinese emperor.
[Music]
Elsewhere in India, this was anything
but a dark age. In the Deccan, the
Satavahana dynasty emerged around the
time of the fall of the Mauryans and
ruled a large chunk of Central India
until the 3rd century. In this dynasty,
30 kings ruled India for about 400
years. At different times, the rule
extended to parts of modern Gujarat,
Madhya Pradesh, and Karnataka. The first
king was Simuka. However, the peak of
the dynasty was in the era of
Gautamiputra Satakarni, who removed the
Saka dynasty completely from Southwest
India and took control of the world's
most important ports like Bharuch,
Kalyan, and Sopara at the time,
flourishing for the international
trading of luxury goods, silk, and
spices. According to the Roman author
Pliny, the Satavahanas could muster an
army of 100,000 men, which they used in
prolonged warfare with invading
Scythians. Romans like Pliny were in a
position to comment on Indian affairs
because of the trade that was
flourishing in this period. According to
the geographer Strabo, over 100 Roman
ships headed to India at the turn of the
millennium, and this trade only
increased under subsequent emperors.
Coins from numerous Roman emperors,
including Trajan and Marcus Aurelius,
have been found across India, and Roman
sources speak of pepper, pearls, and
other treasures brought into the empire
from their Indian trading partners.
India's connections also went east,
especially to China. On top of the trade
that flourished through Central Asian
routes, travelers were moving through
this period, especially Buddhist monks
who brought the faith to China in these
centuries. Meanwhile, in Southeast Asia,
Indian pottery, textiles, and coins from
this period have been found in cities
and even tombs from Malaysia to
Thailand.
Clearly, the rest of the world didn't
think India was in some sort of dark
age, and India became an important trade
partner and intermediary with much of
the world with huge amounts of wealth
and people flowing into and through the
subcontinent.
[Music]
It was certainly a period of prosperity
for Southern India. Dominated by Tamil
culture and language, Southern India in
this period is often called Tamilakam,
literally home of the Tamil.
Tamilakam covered today's Tamil Nadu,
Kerala, Puducherry, Lakshadweep, and
southern parts of Andhra Pradesh and
Karnataka, and this period was one of
significant cultural and political
growth. Tamil culture was still very
distinct from the culture of northern
India. The earliest Tamil literature are
Sangam poems, which were produced
between the 3rd century BC and 3rd
century CE and focused on topics like
romance and war.
While these poems can be beautiful in
their own right, they also give us a
glimpse into how Tamil society worked.
For example, it appears that the varna
caste system wasn't yet practiced in the
south by this point, despite being
centuries old in the north.
There's different religious ideas, such
as the idea of ananku, which are a sort
of magical force or spirit attached to
objects or people.
Gender relations were also quite
different with women being more visible
and having a greater variety of jobs.
There's even reference to kings using
female bodyguards. Sangam literature
makes reference to people whose presence
was seen as inherently polluting or
corrupting to others. For example, in
the Acarakkovai, water touched by a
person classified as pulaiya is
considered unfit for drinking for most
people of any social status, and other
texts speak of untouchables who would
pollute people merely by touch.
Politically, Tamilakam was dominated by
three powerful dynasties, named the
Chera, the Chola, and the Pandyas. These
three dynasties were known as the
Muventar or three crowned rulers and
would vie for power over Tamilakam for
most of the next 1,000 years with power
shifting from one to the other over that
time. The conflicts between these
dynasties are a common feature in Sangam
literature, but their political
divisions didn't fracture the cultural
and linguistic similarities of their
Tamil populations. The Pandyas were the
most dominant in this period. There's
references to them on pillars
established by Emperor Ashoka, and they
seem to have kept a position of relative
dominance in their territory long after
the Mauryans were gone. They made their
capital as Madurai, which, thanks to the
patronage of the Pandya rulers, became
the epicenter of Sangam scholars and
literature production.
[Music]
Meanwhile, after the fall of the
Satavahanas, the Deccan came under the
rule of the Vakatakas. Ruling from
around the 3rd to the 6th century, the
Vakatakas were a very traditionalist
dynasty. Their rulers regularly invoked
ancient ideas and performed old Vedic
rituals to legitimize their kingship.
For example, the second Vakataka king,
Pravarasena, performed the Ashvamedha
horse sacrifice at least four times
during his reign. A later king,
Prithivishena, prided himself on his
wisdom and sound judgment as a ruler.
Probably the most famous legacy of the
Vakatakas are the Ajanta Caves.
These are 30 Buddhist cave monuments
carved into the side of a cliff in the
modern Aurangabad district of
Maharashtra state. The first wave of
construction there actually occurred
under the Satavahanas, but a second wave
of construction under the Vakatakas did
most of the work we can see today. These
cave monuments served as sanctuaries,
shrines, and monasteries for the
Mahayana Buddhist monks and are richly
decorated with carvings and engravings
that are some of the finest examples of
ancient Buddhist art that survived. The
Vakatakas probably also started work on
the Ellora Caves in the same region,
which are a similarly impressive
collection of Buddhist holy sites cut
into the side of a cliff, although
construction there continued for
centuries after the Vakatakas were gone.
Clearly, the Vakataka dynasty was
powerful and important, which eventually
earned them marriage alliances with the
greatest power of classical India, the
Guptas.
[Music]
The Gupta Empire emerged in the early
4th century, but historians aren't even
sure exactly where they came from.
What we do know is that starting in the
4th century, they extended their control
over the majority of northern and
eastern India and wielded significant
influence beyond those borders. The
Guptas pioneered a model of imperial
power that saw emperors exercising
direct control over the empire's core
regions while allowing regional rulers a
lot of freedom so long as they swore
loyalty to the center. The third Gupta
ruler, named Chandragupta I,
no relation to Chandragupta Maurya, laid
the foundations of their empire and took
up the Gupta imperial title of
Maharajadhiraja, which elevated him
above all others. Regional governors
oversaw provinces known as deshas or
bhuktis, and some of these governors
claimed titles once reserved for royalty
like maharaja. In a land as large and
diverse as India, this approach to
ruling was much better suited than a
top-down approach like that of the
Romans.
His son, Samudragupta, expanded the
empire further, leading conquests into
the upper Ganga Valley and even
conquering the ancient Magadha imperial
capital of Pataliputra. Inscriptions
name a long list of kings that he
subdued through battle, but Indian
historical records being as thin as they
are, historians can't agree on who many
of these kings were or what areas
exactly the Guptas controlled. Later
rulers like Chandragupta II
continued these conquests into Bengal
and the Punjab, and it was the Guptas
who finally defeated the Saka Scythians
and drove them out of their Indian
territory in the northwest. We do know
that not every area was taken by arms.
For example, some of the rulers of Assam
chose to bend the knee peacefully and
stayed in power while giving tribute to
the Guptas. The Guptas never controlled
the Deccan or Southern India, but they
did have strong relations with the
Vakatakas through marriage, and sources
indicate that rulers as far as Sri
Lanka, while not under Gupta control,
acknowledged them as the supreme power
in the region.
[Music]
The Gupta period was one of peace,
stability, and propensity that has
earned it the nickname of the Golden Age
of India. It was a time of religious,
artistic, and scientific innovation, and
much of that was driven by the legendary
scholars of Nalanda. Nalanda, in
modern-day Bihar, was a Buddhist
Mahavihara founded by the Guptas, which
became one of the world's greatest
centers of learning. While the
institution itself was Buddhist, it was
patronized by non-Buddhists, too, with
gifts of wealth, supplies, and land
flowing in to support the scholars.
Nalanda scholars specialized in a number
of subjects. Naturally, many of its
achievements were rooted in Buddhism,
with Nalanda scholars penning
influential commentaries and
philosophical works that are still in
use today. For example, the writings of
the scholar Dignaga are the foundation
texts for what is broadly called
Buddhist logic, which is still at the
heart of Buddhist theology and
philosophy today. As well as the
mandatory studies in Mahayana Buddhism,
scholars could study anything from the
Vedas to medicine to astronomy within
its walls. Some gifted scholars would
become adept in multiple fields, and few
were so talented as Aryabhata. Aryabhata
lived in the 5th and 6th centuries and
specialized in the fields of astronomy
and mathematics. His great astronomical
work, the Aryabhatiya, is the only
original work that survives, in which he
correctly deduces the nature of eclipses
and the Earth's rotation, among other
things. To do so, he relied on complex
mathematical equations, a field where he
also made great strides. For example, he
was one of the first Indian
mathematicians to correctly approximate
the value of pi to 3.1416,
and might have been one of the first
people in history to deduce that pi was
an irrational number. Aryabhata's
observations on trigonometry were also
influential, and he's often credited
with discovering the sine and cosine
functions, which got their European
names by translating into Latin the
Arabic versions of Aryabhata's work.
There was also Varahamihira, another
eminent mathematician whose claim to
fame is being the earliest datable
scholar to represent zero as a symbol
and as a number. The concept of zero for
mathematical use was itself a much
earlier Indian invention.
The Guptas were also the first major
empire in history with Hinduism as their
main religion. Hinduism is the world's
oldest living religion, originating over
3,000 years ago from the Vedas. The most
important Hindu deities are those of the
Trimurti, who represent the cosmic
forces of creation, preservation, and
destruction. Brahma represents creation,
responsible for bringing the universe
into existence. By far, the most popular
of this trio is Vishnu. Vishnu
represents preservation and is
worshipped as the supreme deity by the
vast majority of Hindus today. Vishnu is
responsible for maintaining the order of
the universe. He appeared first in the
Rigveda, but gained prominence over time
and supplanted all others. He's usually
depicted as a blue-skinned man with four
arms, each holding a symbolic object.
Preserving the balance of the world
sometimes requires Vishnu to take the
form of avatars, walking the Earth in
the guise of a human or human-like
figure. Probably the best-known avatar
is Krishna, who is often worshipped as a
deity in his own right and is usually
depicted as a blue-skinned man or child.
Then there's Shiva, who traditionally
represents destruction. This isn't a
negative association at all, and
destruction is seen as a necessary and
integral part of creation and
preservation.
The Gupta Empire marked a golden age for
Hinduism, with rulers promoting Sanskrit
learning, codifying sacred text, and
constructing the first grand stone
temples that established lasting
traditions of Hindu art, architecture,
and worship.
The Gupta period left a legacy that
those who came after them could be
thankful for. Both the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata reached their recognizable
modern state that we see them in today.
They were originally written in
Sanskrit, but have since been translated
into almost every language on Earth.
These stories are massive. They're
several times longer than the combined
works of Homer, and longer even than the
Bible and Quran combined.
Everyone in India will know some of the
stories and characters from these works,
and they're some of the most important
cultural ties that all of India share.
The Mahabharata tells the story of a
great war between two families, the
Kauravas and Pandavas. Our heroes, the
Pandava brothers, lose their kingdoms to
their cousins, the Kauravas, in a dice
game.
And after being forced to wander the
wilderness for 13 years, they return to
wage an epic war to reclaim their
rightful heritage. This conflict, known
as the Kurukshetra war, pits heroes
against heroes on both sides. The
standout character of the text is
Arjuna. Arjuna is a gifted warrior who
wields a divine bow and is almost
unmatched on the battlefield. Arjuna is
capable of many incredible feats. For
instance, in one passage, he slays the
warrior Jayadratha by shooting him so
hard that the arrow decapitates him,
carries the head over a mountain back to
Jayadratha's home, and lands in his
father's lap while he's praying. The
sight of his son's head in his lap is
too much to bear, and Jayadratha's
father's own head explodes in shock. We
could spend 10 videos narrating the
events of the Mahabharata and still not
cover everything.
Some in India believe those events are
also historical, as artifacts from the
relevant period are found in those
locations.
[Music]
The Gupta Empire had reached a golden
age where the benefits would reach even
the common people.
According to the Chinese monk Faxian,
who visited the Gupta Empire around 415
CE, the noble families established
charity houses and hospitals. All the
poor, orphans, widowers, childless men,
cripples, and the sick go to those
houses and get help, and doctors treat
their conditions. They get the food and
medicines they need, and when they're
better, they're able to leave on their
own. But it wasn't a golden age for
everyone. Women also lost status and
freedom in this period. In Vedic times,
women had been allowed to study the
Vedas and had more freedom to visit
temples, which vanished with the
consolidation of modern Hinduism in the
Gupta period. This changing attitude to
women is seen in the new belief that
women could only achieve liberation from
the cycle of life and death by being
reborn into a male body first. The
custom of sati, or window burning, where
widows would throw themselves under
their husband's funeral pyre, also
became more common in this period. It
has existed as a concept before, but it
was somewhat normalized during the Gupta
period.
Speaking of women and gender relations,
one of the most famous Indian text was
written in this period, a sutra, or
manual on courtship, relationships, and
lovemaking known as the Kama Sutra.
Today, the name Kama Sutra is
automatically associated with the
sections of the work dealing with sexual
intercourse. While the text does deal
with that topic, most of the text isn't
about sex, but more about relationships
and social expectations. As a result,
it's an incredibly valuable source of
information for family and married life.
The Kama Sutra spends much more time
discussing the ordinary domestic duties
of spouses than it does on the conjugal
ones. The Kama Sutra calls for wives to
be obedient servants, to keep their
house clean and presentable, and to be a
good host when her husband brings guests
over. It outlines the modesty expected
from women when their husbands are away,
and the chastity demanded from widows.
All of these align with the more
controlled role of women that emerged in
this period. But the Kama Sutra also
shows how women had powers and freedoms
in other aspects. For example, according
to the Kama Sutra, it was the women who
managed the household's finances, and if
they were wealthy, managed the servants.
Depending on the household, women could
be expected to be knowledgeable on
matters of agriculture, animal
husbandry, weaving, or other productive
enterprise that she'd be expected to
practice. The Kama Sutra is also a
philosophical text. It delves into the
nature of love and the proper pursuit of
pleasure. Saturated as it is in Hindu
ideas, it doesn't reject physical
pleasure entirely like Buddhism, but
instead places it in the proper context
of a loving marriage, where both spouses
understand and fulfill the duties
expected of them.
Like so many other empires, there was no
single moment where it all came to an
end. The collapse of the Gupta Empire
played out over several decades as
shifting social orders strained the now
centuries-old structures the empire
rested upon. The empire's strengths
became its weakness. The powerful
regional rulers began breaking away from
the late 5th century. Meanwhile, foreign
invaders, such as the Huns, sapped the
empire's resources and chipped away at
the weak-held regions in northern and
western India. In the first decades of
the 6th century, waves of serious
invasions allowed the Huns to overrun
much of the continent. Details of these
conflicts are sparse, but it appears
that the combined efforts of the
remaining Gupta Empire and several other
Indian kingdoms were finally able to
drive them back. But the Guptas would
never regain all the territory or power
they lost. The last Gupta emperor we
know of ruled in the 540s. After that,
they vanish. Along with them went the
golden age of Indian art and literature
and the stability of the trade that had
tied India and much of the surrounding
world together. Once again, a period of
relative unification for India gave way
to regional fragmentation. For the next
few centuries of Indian history, there
is a period of fluctuating kingdoms and
more intense warfare than India had ever
seen before.
First on the list of post-Gupta Indian
empires was that of the Pushyabhuti. The
Pushyabhuti established themselves in
Punjab and extended their influence to
much of northern India. Its first three
kings were nothing notable, but it's the
fourth king, Harsha, who really
mattered. Harsha came to power at just
16 following the betrayal and murder of
his elder brother and brother-in-law by
an alliance of rival kings. Harsha
narrowly saved his sister from
committing sati on the pyre of her dead
husband and went on to subdue the
neighboring kings and republics from
Punjab to central India. He was a
talented military leader, but Harsha was
even more adept at peaceful governance.
According to our sources, he was
tolerant of Hindus and Buddhists,
patronizing Brahmins and Buddhist monks
alike. And he spent time every day
studying his religious texts. He was
something of an itinerant emperor who
preferred to be traveling around his
kingdom listening to his subjects and
dealing with regional issues hands-on
than lazing around in a palace. As well
as being a patron of the arts, Harsha
was also said to have written at least
three plays himself. One, a religious
biography of a Buddhist monk, and the
other two, romantic comedies. He was
also said to be a talented lute player.
The reason we know so much about Harsha
is largely thanks to his biographer,
Banabhatta, who penned India's oldest
surviving biography about his royal
patron. Banabhatta himself is an
interesting character. After a rough
childhood where both his parents died
young, he and his brothers traveled
India with an entourage of dancers,
poets, musicians, and actors where he
gained a reputation as a party animal.
As Banabhatta tells it, he'd put those
days behind him by the time Harsha
summoned him to the court where the king
reprimanded him for his old behavior.
But after Banabhatta proved to the king
that he was a changed man, Harsha
welcomed him into the royal court and he
became one of his most trusted friends.
Another source from Harsha's reign comes
from the Chinese monk Xuanzang, who
visited Harsha's court and praised his
virtuous rule and patronage of Buddhist
temples. This was the same Xuanzang
whose travels were mythologized in the
popular Chinese novel, Journey to the
West. Harsha also sent an ambassador to
visit the Tang emperor of China, who
sent diplomatic missions back in return,
marking some of the earliest formal
diplomatic contact between the two great
civilizations. Unfortunately, Harsha
died without heirs in 647 and his empire
collapsed into warring kingdoms.
The other noteworthy post-Gupta state
was the Chalukya empire of the Deccan.
Formed in the mid-6th century as Gupta
power collapsed, the Chalukyas ruled out
of Badami and have earned a reputation
as powerful warrior kings. Much of their
fame owes to one man, Pulakeshin II.
Pulakeshin was only a child when his
father died in 592. So, power was
wielded by his uncle, Mangalesha. Our
sources are ambiguous on the details,
but it seems that Mangalesha tried to
seize the throne from his nephew. When
the young Pulakeshin came of age, he
appears to have waged a civil war
against his uncle and ultimately
defeated him to claim his rightful
throne by 610. What followed was the
reign of one of India's greatest
military leaders. After suppressing
rebellions that had broken out during
the struggle with his uncle, Pulakeshin
defeated numerous kingdoms in the
Karnataka region and made inroads to the
north, east, south, and to the western
coast. In 619, Pulakeshin personally led
an army north to wage war with King
Harsha and defeated him at the Battle of
Narmada. The victories continued for the
next two decades as Pulakeshin extended
his control. One of his most historic
victories was not offensive, but
defensive when Pulakeshin's navy
successfully repelled an Arab navy sent
under the authority of the Caliph, Umar
ibn al-Khattab, to capture the city of
Thane near Mumbai.
Pulakeshin enjoyed decades of victory,
but it would come to an end when he
crossed blades with the Pallavas to the
south. They fought a series of battles
in the late 630s and early 640s, which
led the Pallava king, Narasimhavarman I,
to invade Chalukya and capture their
capital of Vatapi. Ever the warrior,
Pulakeshin fought to the last, but was
slain by the invading Pallavas.
The Chalukyas did eventually get their
revenge, recapturing their capital in
the 650s and capturing the Pallava
capital at Kanchi Puram in the 730s.
However, the Chalukyas were soon
overthrown by one of their vassals, the
Rashtrakuta, in 753, spelling the end of
the first, but not last, Chalukya
dynasty.
Pulakeshin's battle with the forces of
Caliph, Umar ibn al-Khattab, marked the
first major encounter between Islamic
and Indian powers, beginning the story
of a long and complicated relationship
between Islam and India. Islam burst
onto the scene in the early 7th century
and Muslims swiftly established their
control from North Africa to Persia.
They toppled the Sasanid empire, which
put them on the border of what were then
considered Indian kingdoms in modern
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Arab naval
expeditions targeted India
unsuccessfully as early as 636, but land
invasions would prove more successful.
The seminal example was Sind in
modern-day Pakistan. The region was
considered Indian before the arrival of
Islam and was under the control of the
Brahmin dynasty. Arab raids on the
region began almost immediately after
Muhammad's death and continued into the
640s, but it wasn't until 712 that an
army of the Umayyad Caliphate finally
conquered the region, placing Sind fully
under Muslim control. Today, many
Pakistanis consider this an important
moment in the formation of their nation.
Over the following decades, Islam would
be adopted by the majority of the
population, which remains Muslim to this
day. Control of Sind was the first time
that Muslims held power over a
traditionally Indian population, but it
would be wrong to characterize the
arrival of Islam purely as a phenomenon
of conflict. Trade and travel were just
as important in the early encounters
between Islam and India. Arab traders
were welcomed into Indian ports and
Indian rulers were generally tolerant of
Muslim religion. The Rashtrakutas, who
controlled many of the ports along the
west coast, were happy to allow Muslim
communities to settle in the cities and
establish mosques. As we'll see as we go
through this period, Muslim travelers
went far and wide in India and the
writings of these travelers are some of
the most valuable source material on
this period. Likewise, Sind was still
home to communities of Hindus,
Buddhists, and Jains for centuries under
Muslim rule and Indian ships were a
common sight in Muslim ports. It can be
easy to view interaction between Islam
and India purely through the lens of
conflict and invasion and those issues
won't be absent from the story going
forward, but cooperation and tolerance
were and remain just as important in the
history of Islam and India.
[Music]
Northern India had long been home to
powerful empires and in the vacuum left
behind by the Guptas, three empires
emerged who became locked in a series of
conflicts for control of northern India
and the historic city of Kannauj, known
as the Tripartite Struggle or the
Kannauj Triangle Wars. These empires
were those of the Palas, the Pratiharas,
and the Rashtrakutas. All three empires
emerged in the 750s and were well
established in their own core regions.
The Pratiharas were based in Gujarat and
Rajasthan
and made a name for themselves defending
against Muslim incursions for Sind. One
Arab chronicler speaking of the
Pratihara emperor, Mihira Bhoja, wrote
that, "Among the princes of India, there
is no greater foe of Islam than he." The
Rashtrakutas were the dominant power in
the Deccan after overthrowing the
Chalukyas. Unlike their Pratihara
neighbors, they were much more tolerant
of Islam, permitting preachers and
mosques in their cities as well as
extensive trade with the Muslim world.
It's no surprise that accounts from Arab
travelers are much more positive on the
Rashtrakutas. Stretching across beyond
the Deccan from north to south, they
were the largest of the three empires.
Last but not least, the Palas made their
homes in Bengal. The Palas were
Buddhists. Indeed, they would end up
being history's last Buddhist imperial
power and they were renowned as much for
their diplomacy and scholarship as their
military talents. The Palas had strong
relations with Southeast Asia, with the
Arab world, and especially with the
Buddhist Tibetan empire, and acted as a
magnet for travelers, traders, and
scholars from these regions. The days of
the Tripartite Struggle ended in the
late 10th century with the fragmentation
of the Pratiharas and Rashtrakutas into
numerous smaller kingdoms and lesser
empires. The Palas proved more durable
and endured in some form until the
middle of the 12th century.
In Tamil country, the Pallavas dominated
for much of the second half of the first
millennium, but in the end, the old
Muventar dynasties reasserted
themselves, and this time it was the
Cholas' turn to rule. The Chola Empire
was founded by King Vijayalaya, who
rebelled against his Pallava overlords,
captured the Pallava capital of Kanchi,
and overthrew the dynasty in 893. Over
the following centuries, the Cholas
united more of southern India under the
same banner than any power before them,
but they also expanded their empire
beyond India, becoming one of the only
Indian powers to build a foreign empire.
Under King Raja Raja the First, the
Chola conquered northern Sri Lanka and
the Maldives, but it was his son,
Rajendra the First, who saw the greatest
expansion. Rajendra completed the
conquest of the rest of Sri Lanka, and
then went east, conquering territory in
the Malay Archipelago, Sumatra, and even
Thailand. In 1022, one of Rajendra's
generals led another expedition across
the mainland into Bengal, where they
defeated several regional kings there,
many of them vassals of the Pala Empire,
which led Rajendra to adopt the title
Gangaikonda Chola, the Chola who
conquered the Ganga. The Cholas
dominated all of Southeast Asia as a
result, and the Bay of Bengal has been
described as a Chola lake in this period
for how much power they had over it. The
11th and 12th centuries were the heights
of Chola power. Traders from as far as
China in the east and Egypt in the west
found their way to Chola ports. All of
this trade gave them the money to pay
for their massive army, and in times of
war, the trading vessels could be
repurposed as warships, giving the Chola
the largest navy yet seen in India. The
Cholas didn't neglect trade over land
either, with the Cholas constructing
extensive road networks to support
overland trade. Naturally, a powerful
merchant class arose, and the guilds
representing the various industries that
supplied the goods the Cholas traded
became powerful social institutions. The
Chola rulers also used this wealth to
fund whole new cities, temples, and
legions of artists.
Clearly, early medieval India was a
place of political change, with kingdoms
and empires rising and falling
constantly. However, despite this
political division, it's clear that
India was developing a set of common
beliefs, practices, behaviors, and ideas
that were shared across the political
divisions. Firstly, power and politics
behaved much in the same way in the
various kingdoms. All of the empires
were organized around a central monarch,
who claimed similar titles like
Maharaja, and a warrior nobility who
presided over regions governed by
largely autonomous local rulers who
swore loyalty to the emperor. Power was
generally hereditary from father to son,
although there were some exceptions. For
example, the first Pala ruler named
Gopala was elected by his fellow nobles,
while in the Rashtrakuta Empire, it was
not uncommon for elder sons to be passed
over for inheritance if younger sons
demonstrated superior leadership
qualities. Many empires employed similar
militaries that relied, as Indian
warfare long had, on a combination of
infantry, cavalry, and elephants.
Different empires might have their
specializations.
The Palas were known for their
elephants, the Pratiharas were legendary
for their cavalry, and the Cholas had
their unrivaled navy. But the attitudes
and mechanics of warfare were almost
identical no matter who was fighting.
Sources indicate that medieval India
made liberal use of mercenaries drawn
from a wide range of different peoples
to support their core armies, which
brought Indians from across the
subcontinent together on the
battlefields.
As the medieval age rolled on, Islamic
powers began encroaching into India. For
most of the next thousand years, much of
India would come to be ruled by Muslims.
The Muslim Ghaznavid Empire was one of
the first in this line. In 1001, its
ruler, Mahmud Ghazni, swore to wage
jihad against India every year of his
life to subdue the Hindu kings. Marching
out from his territory in Afghanistan,
Ghazni defeated the Hindu ruler of
Kabul, Jayapala, and swiftly moved
through modern-day Pakistan, capturing
Lahore in 1021 and reaching India by
1030. Although Ghazni's conquests would
mostly slip away after his death, the
Ghurids were the next major power,
overthrowing the ailing Ghaznavids in
and launching a full invasion of India
in 1191 under Muhammad of Ghor. Over the
following years, Muhammad's forces
conquered the Ganga Valley, reaching as
far as lower Bengal in 1203. His
conquests in India might have continued
had he not been distracted by conflicts
in Central Asia in the last years of his
reign. After successfully quelling them,
Muhammad was returning to Delhi via
Pakistan when he was assassinated near
modern-day Sohawa while conducting
evening prayers. In the chaos, one of
his generals and a former slave named
Qutb ud-Din Aibak established himself as
a sultan in Delhi, starting the age of
one of India's great Muslim powers, the
Delhi Sultanate.
[Music]
The Delhi Sultanate would last for 300
years and five separate dynasties, all
of whom would control different
territories at different times. However,
they all shared some common factors.
Obviously, they ruled out of Delhi, they
were all Muslim, and they all claimed
descent from outside of India. The first
dynasty of Qutb ud-Din Aibak was dubbed
the Slave Dynasty, or Mamluk Dynasty to
use the contemporary term. It stood from
1206 to 1290, and was able to secure
control over all of northern India,
stretching from Pakistan to Bengal. The
Mamluks had the unenviable task of
confronting the Mongol Empire, which
began its expansion in this period.
Thankfully for them, the Mongols never
launched a true invasion of India, but
waves of raids occupied much of the
Mamluk Dynasty's military and economic
resources throughout the latter half of
the 13th century. The Mamluk Dynasty
came to an end when court intrigue and
poisoning left only a five-year-old boy
to rule, who was quickly deposed by one
of his generals, Jalal ud-Din. His
Khilji Dynasty would only last for 30
years, but it has the distinction of
having one of the worst rulers in Indian
history. Jalal ud-Din's nephew,
Alauddin, was about as awful as a person
could be. While still serving under his
uncle, Alauddin took an army of several
thousand men south into the Deccan and
told the local rulers that he was
fleeing his uncle's court for fear of
persecution. The ruler of Devagiri
opened his gates to him, only for
Alauddin to immediately sack the city
and carry off its loot. Alauddin then
sent a message to his uncle inviting him
to come and celebrate the victory, which
Jalal ud-Din did, only for Alauddin to
murder him and seize power for himself.
Alauddin's rule was one of tyranny and
violence. He continued to conquer and
pillage cities, such as Warangal, and
added new territories like Gujarat to
his empire. He was paranoid and harsh,
seeing enemies everywhere in his court
and family, which led him to torture and
execute many of them. He cracked down on
Hindu temples, which earned him many
enemies in his Hindu-majority empire.
But he infuriated Muslims, too, when he
admitted 30,000 Mongol Muslim converts
to settle in his territory, only to
massacre them down to every last woman
and child. When he finally died in 1316,
his sons and generals waged a brutal
civil war. Eager to erase all legacy of
Alauddin, the victorious general,
Ghiyath ud-Din Tughluq, made sure to
behead any of the remaining members of
the Khilji line and established his own
Tughluq Dynasty. The Tughluqs weren't
much of an improvement, though. They
heavily discriminated against Hindus and
staffed their top posts exclusively with
Muslims, which earned them dozens of
rebellions.
The second Tughluq ruler, Muhammad, also
launched a disastrous invasion of the
Yuan Dynasty in China with 100,000 men
who got lost and died in the Himalayas.
All of this cost the Sultanate immensely
in money and food, which led to economic
collapse and famine.
[Music]
As the Tughluq Dynasty declined in the
mid-14th century, regions further from
Delhi began to break off. Muslim rulers
in the northern Deccan broke off to form
the Bahmani Sultanate, while Hindu
nobles in the south formed the
Vijayanagara Empire. The Bahmani
symbolized the style of Muslim kingdom
that had become common in India over the
previous 300 years. They were ruled by a
Muslim aristocracy who maintained a
tolerant policy to the Hindu population.
The Bahmani were keen to welcome
immigrants from the Muslim world to act
as mercenaries, administrators, and
scholars.
These westerners, as they were called,
became a useful asset to the empire.
They also employed a greater use of
mobile cavalry that gave them an edge
over Indian rivals, and were probably
the first power to deploy gunpowder
weapons on the subcontinent. Meanwhile,
Vijayanagara followed in the older Hindu
tradition of kingship. Both empires
shared a border along the Krishna River
and spent much of their history locked
in open warfare and rivalry. They fought
four major wars and numerous smaller
skirmishes over their history, which the
Bahmani generally won, forcing the
Vijayanagara to pay tribute to them
several times, although never for very
long. Sometimes war went the other way,
like in 1378, when the Vijayanagara
seized upon the assassination of the
Bahmani Sultan by a disgruntled servant
to invade along the coast and capture
key ports, including Goa. The Bahmani
got their revenge in 1398, when its
armies, under Firuz Shah Bahmani,
invaded Vijayanagara, besieged their
capital, and forced them to pay tribute
once again.
Their most interesting war came in 1406,
when the Vijayanagara ruler, Deva Raya,
who had just won a power struggle
against his brothers for the throne, was
told about a daughter of a goldsmith
whose beauty was without equal. Deva
Raya was captivated and proposed to the
girl, but she rejected him. She didn't
want to marry him because, first, she
was a Muslim and he was a Hindu, and
second, because she knew about the
practice of sati. And given that Deva
Raya had just killed many of his
brothers, she feared that she'd only be
signing herself up to be burned when
someone else deposed him in turn. Deva
Raya was outraged that anyone would
reject him and marched his armies north
to take the girl by force. The girl and
her father fled north to the Bahmani,
but this didn't stop Deva Raya's
pursuit. So, naturally, the Bahmani
Sultan marched to meet him. The
appropriately named War of the
Goldsmith's Daughter lasted for several
months until the Bahmani armies forced
Deva Raya to retreat. In the resulting
treaty, the Bahmani Sultan demanded one
of Raya's daughters as a bride and
married the goldsmith's daughter to his
son.
It was humiliating, but it bought a few
years of peace before the two empires
started killing each other again.
[Music]
Meanwhile, the Delhi Sultans continued
to slip into decline.
The Tughlaq dynasty was already on its
last legs when in 1398, the infamous
Mongol conqueror, Timur, or Tamerlane,
invaded. His brutal five-day sacking of
Delhi crippled the city for a century.
Tughlaqs limped to a quiet end 15 years
later. They were followed by the
Sayyids, heirs to one of Timur's Indian
vassals. But with Timur gone, and
northern India decimated by his
invasion, they could never wield much
power. They were easy pickings then for
the Lodi of Afghanistan to invade in
1451 and establish themselves as the
fifth and final dynasty of the
Sultanate. Things weren't much better
for Vijayanagara and Bahmani, either.
Both empires were torn by internal
strife and regional rebellions that
prevented them even going to war much in
the 16th century. Vijayanagara enjoyed a
brief period of ascendance under Deva
Raya the Second, reaching its greatest
height during his reign with control of
all of southern India up to the Krishna
River, down to Tamil country, and even
receiving tribute from Sri Lanka. But
this golden period was disrupted by more
rebellions and internal strife in the
later 15th century. The Bahmani had it
even worse. Hindu Rajput nobles became
increasingly unhappy with Muslim rule,
and by the 16th century, were in a state
of near perpetual rebellion. This became
too much for the Bahmani Sultanate, and
in 1525,
it fractured into five separate
kingdoms. With the Bahmani gone, Delhi
reduced to a local power, and
Vijayanagara preoccupied with internal
issues, it was the perfect time for
ambitious foreign conquerors to arrive.
Sweeping in from Central Asia, blending
Turkic Mongol warrior culture with
Persian administration and an Islamic
faith, the Mughals were about to make a
triumphant entrance into Indian history.
Almost simultaneously, new ships began
appearing in the ports of western India,
carrying strangers from the distant
lands of Europe.
The Mughals, or Mongols, had made
intermittent appearances in India since
the days of Genghis Khan.
And Timur was technically considered
one. However, the Mughals who arrived in
1526 would not be short-lived raiders,
but the founders of one of India's
greatest pre-modern empires.
[Music]
The Mughals came into India via
Afghanistan under the leadership of
Babur, who claimed direct descent from
both Genghis Khan and Timur. With his
powerful army, Babur defeated the Lodi
Sultan of Delhi at the Battle of Panipat
in 1526
and established himself as the ruler of
northern India. Babur was a warrior, but
also a scholar. He was literate and
wrote about his own impressions of
India. He was fond of its landscape and
marveled at its plants and animals, but
he showed little interest in the Indians
themselves. He constructed palaces that
were basically enclaves of Persian
culture isolated from the surrounding
native Indians, with whom he barely
interacted. But Babur's Mughal Empire
was short-lived. After his death, his
empire was partitioned between his sons
in the Central Asian tradition. India
went to Humayun, but he was not secure
in his power before the Pashtun, Sher
Shah Suri, rebelled against him in 1540
and successfully drove the Mughals out
of India. Humayun sought help from his
brothers, but ultimately didn't get it
and had to flee to the Safavids of
Persia. The Safavids provided him an
army with which he then used to defeat
his brothers and claim control of their
territory. In 1555, he returned to India
with a new army and crushed the Delhi
Sultanate at the Battle of Sirhind
before reclaiming his father's
territories in India. Humayun wouldn't
enjoy them for long, though. Barely 6
months after retaking India, Humayun
tripped down the stairs of his library
and hit his head, dying 3 days later.
However, his death would be the
beginning of a golden age for the
Mughals under his young son, Akbar.
[Music]
Akbar was the Ashoka to Babur's Chandra
Gupta. The grandfather may have founded
the empire, but the grandson would go
down in history as its most famous
ruler, renowned for his wisdom, his
tolerance, and his virtue. Akbar was
just 12 when his father died, so power
was wielded by his regent, Bairam Khan.
Bairam was a capable administrator and
an effective war leader who expanded
Mughal control across northern India.
However, when time came to hand power
over to Akbar, Bairam rebelled. Akbar
put down the rebellion, but offered
mercy to his ally, allowing him to leave
and undertake a pilgrimage to Mecca.
Akbar spent much of his early reign
subduing northern and eastern India.
Akbar was an innovator on the
battlefield, especially with gunpowder,
and made possibly the first use of
cannons in India on Rajput princes in
1569.
The Mughal military would be the first
large military force in Indian history
to rely mostly on gunpowder weapons.
Eventually, he settled on diplomacy to
better integrate the Hindu nobility into
the empire. He took a Hindu wife and
allowed Hindu nobles significant freedom
to manage their own affairs if they
stayed loyal to him. In most other
affairs, Akbar was a big centralizer. He
established the administrative
structures that would maintain the
empire for centuries after him, and he
was good at using them. He was renowned
as a wise and just ruler who was eager
to be involved in running his empire and
strived to balance between his deeply
held Muslim beliefs and those of the
Hindus he ruled. He banned animal
sacrifices and stopped widows from being
forced to commit sati, but allowed Hindu
temples to flourish and was generally
happy to allow Hindus to worship as they
pleased, so long as order was
maintained. After 1564, he abolished the
jizya tax that non-Muslims were usually
obligated to pay to Muslim rulers around
the world. And from 1575, he began
holding regular debates between
religious figures. These debates were
legendary, featuring Hindus, Muslims,
Jains, Christians, and even Zoroastrians
presenting their beliefs in free and
respectful discussion. This toleration
was politically useful, and Akbar
himself seems to have been genuinely
interested in other religions. He also
patronized scholars and artists, a
tradition that later Mughal rulers would
uphold, making the Mughal period one of
cultural and scientific flourishing.
Akbar died in 1605, but he would have
left behind a strong empire, which would
stand for another quarter of a
millennium.
Great men like Akbar often define
history, but the Mughal period offers a
glimpse of great women, too. Neither
India nor the Islamic world saw many
female rulers, but a few emerged in
India at this time. The Mughals had
powerful women of their own, too.
Akbar's son, Jahangir, married one such
woman, Nur Jahan. The two had fallen in
love at a young age, but since Nur Jahan
was from a poor family, Akbar wanted
Jahangir to marry elsewhere and forced
Nur Jahan into a miserable marriage with
another man. As soon as Akbar died,
though, the new emperor broke up that
marriage and married Nur Jahan for
himself. Nur Jahan was a shrewd and
capable politician who amassed
significant power during her her reign.
She was granted power of the royal seal
to give orders and pass decrees, and she
was given power to make appointments to
government offices. In many ways,
Jahangir was the lesser power, and Nur
Jahan wielded true power at his side.
This didn't escape the notice of the
Mughal nobility or Jahangir's heir, Shah
Jahan. After Jahangir died, Shah Jahan
banished Nur Jahan from the court to
make way for another woman whose name
echoes through history, Mumtaz Mahal.
[Music]
Shah Jahan and Mumtaz Mahal were another
love match. They had been engaged to
each other as teenagers and married when
they were about 20 years old. Over their
26-year marriage, it's said that Shah
Jahan did not lie with any of his other
wives and kept them purely as political
alliances. Shah Jahan trusted her as an
advisor, and she was trusted to wield
power in court, giving to officials and
making appointments to important
positions. Together, they had 14
children, but Mumtaz Mahal tragically
died from birth complications during the
last one in 1631.
At her death, Shah Jahan was distraught
and unable to work or eat for days.
Eventually, he decided to give her a
monument worthy of his love for her and
commissioned his court architect, a man
named Ustad Ahmad Lahori, to build her a
mausoleum complex just outside of the
city of Agra that would bear her name
for eternity, the Taj Mahal. It took
years and thousands of laborers to
complete it, but in 1643, Shah Jahan
held the first memorial service there on
the 12th anniversary of his wife's
death. It took another 10 years to
finish the entire complex, but the
results speak for themselves. One
popular myth claims that Shah Jahan cut
off the hands of everyone who worked on
it so they couldn't build anything as
beautiful and gouged out their eyes so
they couldn't see anything as beautiful.
Although historians agree this is just a
myth, Shah Jahan joined his wife there
upon his death in 1648, and since then
the monument has stood as a symbol of
Mughal architecture. It was somewhat
neglected through the 19th century, but
restorations were done in 1908, and
today the Taj Mahal attracts millions of
tourists every year, standing as an
iconic symbol of India's past and
present glory.
[Music]
However, change was coming to India. It
would happen slowly, but in time, India
would be forever changed by the arrival
of newcomers from Europe. There had been
very little direct interaction between
India and Europe since the classical
period a thousand years ago. Trade was
usually indirect, with Indian and
European goods reaching the other
through Arab hands more often than not.
Exceptional cases like Marco Polo were
few and far between, and the only
situations where Indians and Europeans
were likely to meet would be in Arab or
North African trading hubs. That changed
in 1498 when the Portuguese explorer
Vasco da Gama sailed around Africa and
reached India. Da Gama was welcomed by
the local ruler of Calicut, but as
curious as the Portuguese were to the
Indians, the Indians had no reason to
think of them as anything more than just
another group of foreigners there to
trade. They were granted permission to
establish trade outposts known as
factories in several Indian cities, and
soon Indian goods were flowing into
European markets, chiefly at Antwerp in
Belgium.
However, the Indians were quickly made
aware of Europe's technological and
military advantages. While India had
gunpowder and sailing ships, they were
not as widespread or advanced as those
of the Europeans.
When the Mamluk dynasty of Egypt, not to
be confused with Delhi's Mamluk dynasty,
attempted to attack the Portuguese as
punishment for finding a route to India
that didn't go through Mamluk territory,
the Portuguese crashed them on the
island of Diu, near Gujarat, in 1509.
In 1510, Portugal turned its guns on the
Bijapur Sultanate to capture the city of
Goa, which it would hold for the next
450 years. After 1580, King Philip II of
newly unified Spain and Portugal chose
to focus on the Americas instead, which
gave space for other European powers to
muscle in on India.
The Dutch arrived in 1596 and
established the Dutch East India
Company, also known as the VOC, but
their attention would go mostly to the
islands that today make up Indonesia.
The French also tried getting to India
in the 16th century, but it took until
the mid-17th century for them to
consistently get there without the ships
going missing.
[Music]
Then, of course, there were the British.
Jesuit missionary Thomas Stephens became
the first known Englishman to reach
India only in 1579.
He was followed in 1583 by four
Englishmen who were arrested by the
Portuguese and sent as prisoners to
their factory in Goa.
They escaped and found sanctuary in
Akbar's courts.
One became a jeweler for the Mughal
emperor, and another joined trading
expeditions deeper into the continent.
Only one of them, John Newberry, ever
returned home, returning to London in
with detailed information on India that
would be useful to future travelers.
The first English naval expedition
departed that same year under Captain
James Lancaster.
And in 1608, Captain William Hawkins
arrived at the court of Emperor Jahangir
as the first official envoy of the King
of England.
Of course, it wasn't diplomacy the
British were interested in, but trade.
Queen Elizabeth I chartered the East
India Company on December 31st, 1600
with a mandate and monopoly for British
trade in South Asia.
The EIC, often simply called the
company, sent trade expeditions to
India, Indonesia, China, and Japan in
the following years,
bringing Britain firmly into the affairs
of the region. Naturally, the European
powers in India came to blows. Dutch
victories over the British in Southeast
Asia persuaded Britain to focus fully on
the subcontinent, and in 1612, English
and Portuguese ships clashed at the
Battle of Surat, which became Britain's
first major military victory in South
Asia,
and persuaded the Mughal emperor to
allow the British to establish their
first permanent base of operations in
India at Surat.
The British clearly made an impression
on Jahangir, who wrote to King James
promising full protection for all
English merchants in his lands and a
total ban on arrival Portuguese ships
using Mughal harbors.
Meanwhile, but what had been a foot in
the door for the EIC in India would
eventually become a boot on its neck.
[Music]
That would take time, though, and the
presence of the Europeans was mostly a
side story for Indians for the 16th and
17th centuries.
The Mughal Empire continued pushing
south into new territories, reaching its
territorial height under Emperor
Aurangzeb, but his reign spelled the
beginning of the decline of Mughal power
as new problems emerged. Aurangzeb spent
his early reign dealing with Central
Asian raids, which allowed Shivaji
Bhonsle to carve out a kingdom of his
own in the Deccan, and from the Mughal
vassal states to the south, known as the
Maratha kingdom. The Deccan Wars against
the Marathas would occupy most of
Aurangzeb's military attention for the
next two decades. In 1674, Shivaji
declared himself the ruler of a full
Maratha Empire, and it took until after
Shivaji's death for Aurangzeb to subdue
them. Although it didn't last much
beyond his own death. The Mughal's
famous tolerance also evaporated under
Aurangzeb. From the 1670s, he embraced a
hardline Islamic approach, which led him
to reinstate the jizya for non-Muslims,
setting up an Islamic morality police
called the Muhtasibs, and ordered
several Hindu temples to be demolished
and replaced with mosques. His
persecution of Hindus permanently
alienated many Hindus, but perhaps his
harshest persecution fell upon a new
religious group that had emerged in the
Punjab calling themselves Sikhs.
[Music]
Sikhism is the youngest of the world's
major religions and owes itself to the
Punjabi religious leader Guru Nanak.
Born into a Hindu family in the Punjab
in 1469,
he echoed earlier Indian religious
visionaries by setting aside his old
life following a religious epiphany
while meditating when he was 30 years
old.
Guru Nanak preached a holistic
monotheistic creed that he believed
could unify all people in worship of a
single God. In his words, "There is no
Hindu, there is no Muslim." Guru Nanak
spent the next 40 years of his life
traveling on religious pilgrimages known
as Udasi to preach his message.
When he died on September 22nd, 1539, he
amassed a sizable following that
continued to expand after his death as
new gurus stepped up to lead the Sikh
community. Sikhism emphasizes the
individual's personal relationship with
God and his duty to pursue justice in
service to others without any
expectation of reward. Like other
religions, it warns against destructive
behaviors and emotions, chiefly the five
vices of attachment, ego, greed, lust,
and rage. As the religion developed,
other practices were added. One of the
best known is the traditions of the five
K's, where Sikhs are obligated to wear
five articles of faith to symbolize
their devotion. These are the Kachera, a
type of undergarment, the Kangha, a
wooden comb, a Kara, metal bracelet,
Kesh, uncut hair, and a Kirpan, dagger
or sword. The Mughals didn't think much
of this religious sect at first, but by
the time of the fifth Guru, Arjan Dev,
authorities had started to take notice.
Mughal authorities under Emperor Jahan
Gear accused him and other Sikh leaders
of fomenting rebellion and took Arjan
into custody and demanded his conversion
to Islam. When Arjan refused, he was
executed. The execution of Guru Arjan
was a landmark moment in Sikh history
that began a long struggle with the
Mughals and other ruling powers in
India. It has been described as a moment
of political awakening for the Sikhs
that would shape their history for
centuries to come.
[Music]
The persecution of the Sikhs was both a
symptom and a cause of a wider Mughal
decline.
The existence of Sikh resistance showed
that the Mughals grip on India was
failing and their harsh response only
hardened the resolves of Sikhs to resist
them.
Aurangzeb found as much upon executing
the ninth Guru, Tegh Bahadur, in 1772,
which ignited a fierce Sikh rebellion
that persisted until after his death.
Another major Sikh rebellion under Banda
Singh Bahadur erupted in 1709
with the Sikhs successfully taking
several cities and winning several
battles with the Mughals before Banda
was captured.
Banda was taken to Delhi in 1716 where
Banda, his son, and 2,000 of their
followers were brutally blinded,
dismembered, flayed, and beheaded in
public view. It ended the rebellion, but
it all but assured the Sikhs would never
forgive or submit to Mughal authority.
The empire had numerous other problems,
too. Akbar's centralization had been a
tremendous strength of the empire under
capable rulers, but mediocre or
disinterested emperors made that
centralized system a vulnerability. As
central authority decayed, regional
leaders asserted themselves.
And as Aurangzeb's harsher religious
policy continued under his successors,
Hindu local rulers began searching for a
way out. In 1724, the Nizam of Hyderabad
declared his independence, carving off a
sizable chunk of the Deccan from Mughal
rule. The Awadh went independent the
same year under Saadat Ali Khan. Mughal
decline wasn't helped by a Persian
invasion in 1739 by Nader Shah. The
Mughals were defeated despite having a
six-to-one numbers advantage over the
Persians at the Battle of Karnal, which
allowed Nader Shah to pillage Delhi.
There were several more invasions in the
following years with the most
destructive one coming from the Durranis
of Afghanistan in 1752
when Delhi was brutally sacked, its
citizens enslaved, and its temples
defiled and smeared with cow blood.
[Music]
With the Mughals on the ropes, the
Marathas of the Deccan returned with a
vengeance. They had not forgotten their
suppression under Aurangzeb, and in the
1740s, they stormed out of the Deccan
and rapidly expanded across India.
Between 1740 and 1761,
the Marathas extended their power over
Rajasthan and Karnataka, launched
multiple military raids into Bengal,
captured Orissa in 1755,
and in 1757
invaded Delhi.
Delhi was still a wreck from multiple
previous invasions and was effectively
under the control of Afghan puppet
leaders, and it took just two weeks for
Maratha forces to capture the city.
The Marathas were now the largest power
in India. This new Maratha empire
differed from the Mughals or the British
in that it was more of a confederacy
than an empire.
Power was wielded from the center by a
Peshwa, which is usually translated as
prime minister in English, but was
functionally a hereditary noble.
However, practical power was wielded in
different parts of the empire by the
four great Maratha noble families who
effectively ruled their own pieces of
the empire. These were the Bhonsle in
Nagpur, the Gaekwads of Baroda, the
Holkars from Indore, and the Scindias
ruling in Gwalior. This decentralization
allowed regional interests to be
protected, but they would also be fault
lines that would pave the way to the
collapse of the Marathas.
In 1761, the Marathas tried to expand
further, but were met by the Afghan
Durranis in a massive battle at Panipat
in January.
This Battle of Panipat was one of the
largest battles of the 18th century with
over 100,000 men participating, complete
with cavalry, war elephants, and
artillery.
The Maratha army was defeated with some
30,000 casualties, putting a halt to
their expansion.
Meanwhile, the British had been slowly
building up their power. By 1647, they
had 23 trading posts across India and
continued to gain more in the following
decades. The three most important of
these were Madras, founded in 1639,
Bombay, founded in 1661,
and Calcutta, founded in 1690. These are
the cities of Chennai, Mumbai, and
Kolkata today, respectively, and would
serve as the most important cities in
British-ruled India.
The British had found great success in
Southern India where the collapse of the
Vijayanagara Empire in the early 17th
century created plenty of minor rulers
and petty kingdoms eager to get an edge
over their rivals by allying with the
British and getting the protection of
the British troops and British ships.
Despite what you might expect, the
British did not immediately start
conquering everything on the
subcontinent. For most of the 17th and
early 18th century, things were
relatively quiet. The British were more
concerned with fending off rival Dutch
and French interests than in conquering
native territory. The British enjoyed
productive relations with the Mughals
and local princes.
The British were few in number. They
lacked both the inclination or the power
to start making enemies of India's
people. This focus on trade was
lucrative and successful for Britain
with some 1/7 of its imports being from
India by the early 18th century.
That's not to say the British weren't
involved in Indian wars or politics, but
they were far from a dominant force.
Instead, the British and other European
powers were treated as potential allies,
sources of wealth, and providers of arms
for Indians to resolve their own
conflicts. Rather than Europeans
suddenly showing up and taking charge of
Indian history, Europeans were more of a
wild card stepping into existing
rivalries, alliances, and conflicts.
The Europeans, of course, brought their
own conflicts, not least of all the
British and the French. The French East
India Company had established itself at
Pondicherry and by the 18th century was
Britain's main European rival in India.
They fought three wars known as the
Carnatic Wars that began as extensions
of European wars, but became more
interwoven with Indian conflicts over
time. The First Carnatic War of 1746 to
1749 was mostly an expansion of the
ongoing Austrian War of Succession to
India. A second war erupted between 1749
and 1754
when the British and French backed
separate candidates to become the Nawab
of the Carnatic, a conflict that the
British ultimately won. The third and
final Carnatic War effectively spelled
the end of French power in India. Again,
war in Europe, this time the Seven
Years' War spilled over into India. The
French were more aggressive, but no more
in Chandannagar in 1757 and Wandiwash in
1760 before the British captured the
center of French power in India at
Pondicherry in 1761.
The French and British signed a treaty
that returned Pondicherry to the French
in 1763,
but the British would exercise
significant control over them, and the
French were forced to support
British-backed client governments in
India. The British had fended off all of
the rival European powers in India, but
almost simultaneously, a new phase began
where Britain would extend its dominance
over Indian power, too.
[Music]
As part of its conflict with the French,
the British had fortified their outpost
at Fort William in Calcutta. This
military buildup put the Nawab of
Bengal, Siraj ud-Daulah, on edge, and he
demanded the British stop. When they
refused, Siraj gathered his army and
marched on Calcutta. The meager British
garrison was no match for Siraj's army,
and the British commander was forced to
flee, leaving a token force of British
and Indian allied soldiers to hold back
the Nawab long enough to escape. The
Indian soldiers immediately went over to
Siraj while the British troops were
captured. After taking the fort, the
approximately 60 captured British
soldiers were shoved into a tiny
14-by-18 foot hole in the fort's prison,
which became known as the Black Hole of
Calcutta. Stuffed into the hole with no
food, water, or fresh air, around 2/3 of
the men died in agony overnight. It was
probably done by soldiers without
Siraj's knowledge. But when news about
the Black Hole incident reached the
British, they were furious. An East
India Company army was dispatched from
the company base in Madras and met
Siraj's forces at the Battle of Plassey.
Unbeknownst to Siraj, the British had
made a secret deal with one of his
generals, Mir Jafar, to betray the Nawab
in the battle. When Siraj's 50,000 men
met the British army of 3,000, it was
crushed. Mir Jafar quietly withdrew his
troops at a critical point in the
battle, allowing the British to cut down
the Bengal army at a rate of almost 20
Bengali losses to one British. The
Battle of Plassey was a landmark moment.
Siraj was captured and executed, with
Mir Jafar being named the new Nawab of
Bengal.
But in effect, the British now ruled
there. It is widely considered the start
of British colonial rule in India. Mir
Jafar was no more loyal to the British
than he was to Siraj. He quickly allied
with the Dutch to throw off the British,
who then chose to back his son-in-law,
Mir Qasim, instead. Qasim proved
unreliable, and the British decided to
forgive Jafar and return him to power.
Qasim was less than happy and appealed
to the Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II for
aid. The Mughal Emperor heeded the call,
as did the Nawab of Awadh, combining the
most powerful leaders of the Mughal
Empire and its subject territories
against the British at the Battle of
Buxar in 1764.
Despite outnumbering the British by more
than two to one, the Mughal forces were
soundly defeated. In the resulting
Treaty of Allahabad, the defeated Mughal
Emperor granted the EIC the right to
collect all taxes and revenues from
Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa. Known as the
Diwani, this privilege was technically
being done on the behalf of the Mughal
Emperor. And the company owed him an
annual tribute from that revenue, but it
was still a humiliating concession for
the Mughals. Having defeated the French,
the Bengalis, and the Mughals by 1765,
the British had established control over
a sizable portion of India
and made themselves the greatest
military power on the subcontinent. Most
of India was still ruled by Indians, but
it would not be for long. The age of
company rule had begun.
It's been said that the British acquired
their empire by accident. That's a
misleading way to present it, but it's
certainly the case that the British
Empire was not pre-planned in advance.
When the EIC arrived in India, it didn't
do so with dreams of conquest of the
subcontinent. After acquiring the
Diwani, the company initially didn't
show much interest in governing or
reforming anything. Their primary
concern was trade, and so long as trade
continued, they didn't feel the need to
sweep out the native officials or pass
laws to reshape Indian society. This
would change over time, but the
company's stated policy was to, quote,
"Adapt our regulations to the manners
and understandings of the people,
adhering closely, as we are able, to
their ancestral uses and institutions."
In short, do as little as possible to
keep profit high.
This was seen in their response to a
famine that gripped Bengal in 1769 and
1770.
Monsoon failures in 1768 and drought in
1769 combined to provoke sweeping crop
failures. But despite being warned of a
potential famine on the horizon, the
company did not take concrete steps to
prepare, and company officials were more
concerned with the interruptions to
trade. By the time famine struck in
earnest in November of 1769,
they were still unprepared. They set up
grain distribution centers in early
1770, but these were not enough to
contain the crisis, which worsened over
the summer and only stopped with the
monsoon rains in the second half of
1770.
At the time, officials estimated some 10
million dead, but modern scholarship
says a more realistic number is around 1
million. Into the 1770s, the British
were still largely ignorant of India,
and few of its officials spoke an Indian
language. In 1773,
Parliament tried to clear things up with
the Regulating Act, which reined in the
company's power and tried to impose some
sort of organization to British rule
there. The company had to ensure a set
amount of goods returned to Britain
annually and had to pay for the
privilege of holding Indian territories
on behalf of the Crown. It also
established a governing council of five
members to help manage India and a
governor general to be appointed to
oversee all affairs in India. The
British continued to make various tweaks
to administration in the coming decades,
most significantly in 1793,
the Cornwallis Code, implemented by
Governor-General Charles Cornwallis,
famous as the British commander who
surrendered at Yorktown during the
American Revolution, which claimed to
tackle corruption in company ranks. It
banned those holding offices from
engaging in private trade, purged
corrupt officials, and tightened up a
tax system based heavily on the existing
Mughal one. But it also banned Indians
from holding higher offices in the
company hierarchy. To the British,
Indians were inherently immoral and
untrustworthy. So banning them from
power was a form of fighting corruption.
Cornwallis's Code symbolized the racist
attitude that would define British rule
in the subcontinent. Indians could still
serve the British as soldiers, though,
and there were over 100,000 of them,
known as sepoys, by 1800, which the
company would find plenty of use for.
[Music]
Aside from the British in Bengal, and
with the Mughals all but irrelevant, the
greatest Indian power was the Marathas,
who ruled most of western and northern
India. Further south, the kingdom of
Mysore controlled the southwestern
coast. The Nizams of Hyderabad clung to
power in the central and southern
Deccan, and the Sikhs had asserted
themselves in the Punjab. While Britain
continued to insist that its only
interest was in trade, in a matter of
decades, they would defeat or absorb all
of these remaining powers and embroiled
themselves in a complicated web of
shifting rivalries and alliances. First
on the chopping block was Mysore. Mysore
had arisen in the wake of the Maratha
defeat at Panipat, using the Marathas'
weaknesses to carve out a kingdom of
their own in the south. When Mysore
refused to cooperate with British trade
ambitions, the British joined the
Marathas and Hyderabad in waging a war
on them in 1767.
But Mysore shocked the British by
defeating their armies and marching up
to the gates of Madras. Mysore's ruler,
Hyder Ali, compelled the British to make
peace and sign a protective treaty
against the Marathas. The British did
not honor that treaty, though, leaving
Mysore to fend for itself against
Maratha attacks, which encouraged Hyder
Ali to launch a second war in 1780.
Initially, it was a very successful, and
Mysore defeated the British handily at
the Battle of Pollilur, using modified
artillery that used rocket-like
projectiles. The tide of the war turned,
though, with British victories and
Hyder's death. And in 1784, his son,
Tipu Sultan, signed a peace treaty with
the British to stop the fighting.
There was a third war between 1790 and
1792,
but this time the British called in
support from the Marathas and Hyderabad,
who had both become uncomfortable with
Mysore's military power. Tipu put up a
strong defense, but even the so-called
Tiger of Mysore could not win against
those odds, and he was forced to
surrender about half of his territory.
The British returned for a fourth time
in 1799 to finish the job. Tipu had
secretly reached out to Napoleon, who
was conquering Egypt at this time, which
the British took as a sign that Mysore
was too much trouble to tolerate. In
February 1799, company forces invaded
Mysore,
captured the capital at Seringapatam,
killed Tipu Sultan in combat, and added
his territory to their domains. At the
same time, the British compelled
Hyderabad to sign itself over as a
protectorate, giving Britain control of
nearly all of southern India.
[Music]
The Marathas would not be long for the
world, either. The British had stepped
into Maratha affairs back in 1775
by backing a rival claimant to Maratha
rule, only for their faction to be
defeated. However, that claimant's son,
Baji Rao II, was eventually installed as
a puppet ruler by the same nobles who'd
opposed the British. After reaching
adulthood, Baji Rao reached out to the
British and signed the Treaty of Bassein
in 1802, securing British support for
his rule in exchange for allowing
British troops and a British adviser
into his territories. The treaty was
described as the death knell of the
Maratha Empire, and most of the Maratha
nobility recognized it as such. Three of
the four leading Maratha clans, the
Bhonsle, Holkar, and Sindhias, took up
arms against the British and Baji Rao,
but they were defeated in the Second
Anglo-Maratha War. In the resulting
treaty, Baji Rao II became effectively a
British puppet, ruling the Marathas
while the British acquired control of
new territory like the state of Haryana
and the major city of Ahmednagar. The
British also forced a close alliance
with the fourth Maratha clan, the
Gaekwads, who had not opposed them in
the previous war. In 1817, a dispute
over tax collection led to Baji Rao
murdering a Gaekwad diplomat. The
British brokered a treaty that crammed
down harsh terms on Baji Rao, who by
this point the British felt was becoming
a bit too powerful and independent. The
terms demanded that Baji Rao hand over
key forts, stop collecting taxes from
the Gaekwad lands, abolish his cavalry,
and break off diplomatic ties with other
Indian states. They were unreasonable
demands crafted to back Baji Rao into a
corner. Baji Rao refused to abide by the
insulting terms and began rallying his
forces to oppose the British. However,
British spies were fully aware of him
building his forces and conspiring to
assassinate British officials. In
November of that year, the British sent
an army to deal with Pindari raiders in
Maratha territory. Baji Rao, with the
support of the Bhonsle and Holkar clans,
attacked this army but was soundly
defeated at the Battle of Khadki.
The Marathas went into retreat and the
initiative stayed with the British. Over
the next six months, the British
systematically dismantled the Marathas.
Baji Rao was exiled and all of his lands
were taken under British dominion. With
the fall of the Marathas in 1818,
Britain now controlled almost all of
India.
[Music]
The British spent the first half of the
19th century absorbing the remaining
areas of India and its surrounding
territory.
They took Surat in 1800, the Carnatic,
Nellore, and Trichinopoly in 1802, and
Nepal in 1816. In 1824, the British
waged a war against Burma, acquiring
large areas of northeastern India, most
notably Assam, and taking more territory
in Burma in subsequent wars. In 1838,
the British were fighting on the
opposite side of India by waging the
First Anglo-Afghan War, which resulted
in the destruction of Kabul and the
extension of British influence, but not
direct control of Afghanistan. In 1843,
it was Sindh's turn to be attacked by
the British and in a lightning five-week
campaign, just 3,000 British troops
under Charles Napier defeated the ruling
Talpurs and brought Sindh under
non-Muslim control for the first time in
1,000 years. Often, the British didn't
need to invade a territory to acquire
it. Many of the remaining Indian rulers,
controlling small areas with no hope of
opposing the British, submitted en
masse, accepting British authority and
limits on their power in exchange for
British protection, trade, and
permission to stay on their throne.
These princely states numbered around
500 and comprised about 1/3 of
British-controlled India, ranging
between kingdoms of several hundred
square miles and holdings that were
barely more than a town. In 1848, they
cut out the middleman by implementing
the doctrine of lapse, by which the
British reserved the right to annex any
Indian state that had no adult male heir
upon the death of a ruling monarch. The
British used this system to acquire
Satara in 1848,
Jaipur and Sambalpur in 1849,
Baghat in 1850, Udaipur in 1852,
Jhansi and Nagpur in 1854,
and Tanjore and Arcot in 1855.
The British also annexed Awadh in 1856,
citing internal corruption and failures
of its government as justification.
[Music]
By the 1840s, the last truly independent
power left in India was that of the
Sikhs. As Mughal power had declined back
in the 18th century, the Sikhs had
formed republics throughout the Punjab
called misls. Beginning in 1799, the
leader of one of these misls named
Ranjit Singh began unifying them by
capturing cities like Lahore and
Amritsar to create a new Sikh Empire.
Despite its name, the Sikh Empire had
Muslims, Hindus, Parsis, and others
within its border and they were treated
well initially.
People of many faiths could be found as
officers, administrators, and advisers.
Hindus especially were treated with
respect.
The Sikhs passed a total ban on the
slaughter of cows and Sikh rulers
patronized Hindu temples. Although this
cow slaughter ban was not so popular
with Muslims. This Sikh Empire acted as
a bulwark against the invasions by the
Afghan Durrani Empire and quickly
established itself as one of the major
powers on the Indian subcontinent.
They enjoyed good relations with the
British at first and the British were
generally warmer towards the Sikhs than
they were to Hindus. The empire's
fortunes took a bad turn with Ranjit
Singh's death in 1839.
Over the next four years, the empire saw
four different emperors, three of whom
were assassinated and a massive buildup
of military forces as regional nobles
and insecure leaders sought to protect
themselves.
In response to the chaos, the British
increased their military presence along
the border, which in turn angered the
Sikhs. In December 1845, a Sikh army
crossed the River Sutlej into disputed
territory, which the British interpreted
as an act of war. The resulting
Anglo-Sikh War lasted less than three
months and the British dominated the
battlefield. The seminal battle came as
Sobraon on February 10th, 1846,
with British and Indian sepoys defeating
the Sikh army.
Towards the end of the battle, the Sikhs
tried to withdraw across the Sutlej
River, but the bridge broke, trapping
them with the British. According to most
accounts, the trapped Sikhs refused to
surrender and fought to the last man.
The battle brought an end to the war and
the resulting treaty of Lahore ceded
control of large swaths of territory to
the British or their subject rulers,
most notably Kashmir, which got added to
the lands of the Prince of Jammu. The
five-year-old heir, Duleep Singh, was
installed in the Sikh Empire with a
British regent, effectively giving
control of the empire to the company.
This arrangement caused resentment and
led to a Sikh rebellion in 1848, which
dragged on for almost a year until the
British won a decisive victory at the
Battle of Gujrat. In the wake of the
Second Anglo-Sikh War, Duleep Singh was
deposed and exiled to Britain, while the
territories of the Sikh Empire were
fully absorbed by the British. With the
end of the Sikh Empire, Britain now
controlled virtually every inch of
India.
[Music]
The British wanted to civilize India, to
stamp out the traditions and practices
that Britain disliked and impose their
own ideas upon it. Some of these were
more popular than others. Most famously,
the Sati Regulation of 1829 made the
ancient practice of widow burning
illegal and punished anyone who tried to
compel a widow to do it. Also
significant was the 1843 Indian Slave
Trade Act, which made slavery and slave
trading illegal in India, bringing it
into line with the rest of the British
Empire, where the trade had been banned
since 1833.
Many Indians supported these laws, but
objected to the British being the ones
to impose them, rather than allowing
Indians to change society with their own
voices. Defenders of British imperialism
have argued that India benefited from
what the British did, citing laws like
those banning Sati and slavery as proof
of the benefits of Britain's civilizing
mission. The introduction of new
technology, such as steam-powered ships,
the telegraph, and of course the
railroad, have also been championed as
improvement. However, when it came to
technology, the average Indian rarely
benefited from them. They would never
get to use a telegram and the railroads
were primarily for the transport of
goods and resources, not the people who
produced them. The British were also
adamant that civilization meant British,
not Indian. To achieve economic and
political power, Indians had to undergo
English education, adopt English habits,
and speak the English language. In
effect, the only path for an Indian to
improve their position in British-ruled
India was to become less Indian. The
result was a sense of alienation and a
simmering hostility towards the British.
Indians were being ruled over by people
who didn't much care about them, who had
subjugated or destroyed anyone who
opposed them, who promised improvements
that most failed to see, who were trying
to rewrite their society to match
foreign ideas, and who had no interest
in listening to what Indians had to say
about it. It is inevitable that these
embers of rebellion would spark an
inferno and when that inferno came, it
would burn down empires.
[Music]
>> That inferno erupted over an unlikely
source. By 1857, the company employed
some 300,000 Indian soldiers known as
sepoys, drawing from Muslims and Hindus
alike. In the end, it was the ammunition
these soldiers were given that triggered
a massive rebellion. Rumors began to
spread amongst the soldiers that the
ammunition cartridges used in the
standard issue British rifles, which
soldiers had to bite into to use, were
being greased with tallow from cows and
pigs. Hinduism and Islam had strict
religious prohibitions on consuming each
animal respectively. As the rumor
spread, many sepoys came to believe that
the British had done it intentionally to
humiliate and defile their beliefs,
while others thought it was
unintentional but displayed a lack of
care and respect from the British. In
truth, there was no such animal grease
in the cartridges. But, once the rumor
started, it was impossible to contain.
The British suspended all production of
the specific type of cartridge to try
and calm people down. But, most took it
as confirmation that the rumors had been
true. On May 10th, 1857, their anger
reached a boiling point and thousands of
sepoys based in Meerut, near Delhi, rose
up and massacred every European they
could find.
Soon, civilians joined them and then the
nobility. The sepoys marched to Delhi
Fort and the Mughal Emperor Bahadur Shah
II threw his support behind the rebels.
Fighting broke out across India. In
Kanpur, for example, the sepoys revolted
against the British population. They
offered the 900 British residents of the
city the chance to leave and escorted
them to the boats, only to massacre
them. Just seven people survived.
Support for the rebellion was far from
universal. As in most rebellions, the
vast majority kept their heads down and
waited for violence to fizzle out. Sikhs
and Pashtuns generally threw in with the
British and their loyalty earned them
favor over their Hindu and Muslim
counterparts afterwards. The British
were utterly shocked by the rebellion.
They had dismissed the Indians as
passive and compliant and were now
paying the price. They scrambled to call
in reinforcements from as far afield as
China and Crimea
and in September, they marched upon
Delhi.
Ultimately, the rebels were defeated and
the British inflicted a bloody revenge
upon Delhi's population, complete with
looting and pillaging of the city's
treasures. Among the victims were the
Mughal princes, who were publicly
executed for supporting the rebels. The
Mughal Emperor himself was deposed and
exiled to Burma and the Mughal Empire
was formally dissolved after some 300
years of existence. The rebellion was
fully suppressed by 1858, but some
800,000 Indians and British had died
from a combination of combat, massacres,
disease or famine as a result of it.
Thousands of rebels were executed with a
method of tying them to the front of a
cannon and firing being a particular
favorite that the British borrowed from
the Mughals. The rebellion failed to
overthrow British rule, but it did rack
up another important casualty, the East
India Company.
The company had been falling out of
favor in London for a while and the
rebellion was the final nail in the
coffin that proved the company was no
longer fit to rule India. The company's
charter was not extended and in 1858,
the British government took direct
control over all of its territory in
India, beginning the age of the British
Raj.
Still, the rebellion had shown that
Indians could unite to force change and
once that realization had been made, it
could not be forgotten.
[Music]
The formal annexation of India did not
immediately change much.
The Governor-General was renamed the
Viceroy
and the Executive Council was expanded
with more members and could now include
more Indians.
But, for the average Indian, these
changes meant little.
They still had no voice in affairs, but
there was more pressure than ever for
them to find one.
[Music]
Trade continued to be a high priority
for the British during the Raj as it had
during company rule. Agriculture formed
the backbone of this trade.
Opium counted for as much as 30% of
Indian exports in the 1860s, but
restrictions on the trade all but
eliminated it in the following decades.
Cotton and jute for textile production
were another major Indian export,
especially in Bengal,
where some 20,000 people were employed
in jute mills. Then, of course, there
was tea, the production and export of
which grew massively in the late 19th
century to eclipse that of China. By
1900, almost 70,000 tons of tea was
being exported to Britain from India
every year. These exports were primarily
under the control of British merchants
and traders and it was they who reaped
the profits. The life of an average
Indian agricultural worker was not much
different in 1860 as it had been in
1560.
Even the celebrated railroads, which
Britain spent tens of millions of pounds
building across India after 1857,
primarily served to move goods, not
people and certainly not the common
people. Through it all, the British
remained a tiny minority in India. At
any one point, there were no more than
about 100,000 British people in India.
Soldiers, missionaries, sailors,
government officials and their families
made up the majority. Few came to settle
permanently there or integrate into
native society. The British in India
took great pains to isolate themselves
from the population, preferring to live
in walled-off districts with tea
gardens, churches and other amenities
expected by the British upper crust.
Interactions between Indians and the
British were strictly controlled and
reflected dominant racial and gender
attitudes. For example, relationships
between Indian men and British women
were strictly prohibited. Meanwhile,
liaisons between British men and Indian
women, in most cases between soldiers
and prostitutes, but also aristocratic
men who left their wives at home, were
begrudgingly accepted but officially
discouraged. By some estimates, over 60%
of British soldiers serving in India
contracted venereal diseases. But,
responsibility for this was laid
squarely on Indian women, who British
authorities viewed as innately unclean
and corrupting. The Contagious Diseases
Act of 1868, for example, had a long
list of provisions and punishments for
Indian women blamed for spreading such
diseases, but not for the British men.
[Music]
The British figures who had some of the
most direct interactions with Indians
were Christian missionaries. European
missionaries had followed close on the
heels of traders in the 16th century,
but a cultural shift in Britain in the
19th century lent huge support to
missionary work across the empire and
India was flooded with them as a result.
These missionaries could be a blessing
and a curse. Missionaries brought
education, setting up thousands of
schools that taught rural children how
to read and write. On the other hand,
these schools were designed to break
them off from Hindu religion and Indian
social attitudes to remake them into
good Christians. These missionaries had
negative views of Indian religion,
seeing it as misguided superstition at
best and outright demonic at worst and
often held similarly dim views of
Indians as a race. Missionaries often
treated Indians as people who were
little better than children, needing the
guidance of Europeans to keep them from
idleness and stagnation. Broadly
speaking, British missionaries did not
see the success in India that Europeans
had seen converting people in the
Americas or Africa. However, there were
a sizable number of Indians who did
convert. Take the Khasi people of Assam,
who were the recipients of a Welsh-led
mission from 1841.
The lead missionary, Thomas Jones,
established a writing system for the
Khasi language and translated much of
the Bible into that language. Tens of
thousands of Khasi children were taught
to read and write with it through
missionary schools. And today, over 80%
of the 1.5 million Khasi are still
Christian.
Today, there are around 30 million
Christians in India, almost all of whom
come from communities converted by
British missionaries. That's barely 2%
of the population, but they outnumber
Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs overall.
[Music]
Outside of missionary schools, Indian
elites could acquire a Western-style
education, but it didn't take long for
these Indians to begin wielding these
ideas against the British.
For example, in 1878, Indian critics
turned Britain's rhetoric of free speech
and free press back on itself when the
British passed the Vernacular Press Act,
which censored criticism of British
policies in the Second Anglo-Afghan War.
While there was nothing like the 1857
Rebellion, local resistance against
British policy became more common in the
late 19th century. There were several
rebellions among the Adivasi against
British control of their ever-shrinking
rural communities. Most notably, the one
led by Birsa Munda in 1899 to 1900.
British attempts to push social reforms
were also a point of contention. For
example, the British pushed for expanded
education for women, raising the
marriage for girls, and the rights of
widows to remarry, all of which led to
some opposition. For example, the 1891
Age of Consent Act, which raised the age
of consent from 10 to 12, provoked
massive riots and opposition in Bengal.
Many of these reforms were supported by
Indian intellectuals and many common
people, but were often opposed on the
principle that it wasn't Britain's place
to rewrite Indian society, and that
Indians should be the ones making those
decisions. Other problems struck India
that fueled disillusionment with British
rule. Regional famines gripped Western
and Central India in the late 1860s and
then Bengal in the 1870s. Millions died
in food shortages in the 1890s across
India, which were attributed to failures
of the monsoon rains and overpopulation.
British authorities were unable to
respond effectively to them. Worse was
the bubonic plague that reemerged across
South and East Asia in the late 19th
century. Some 12 million Indians were
killed by the plague and the quarantines
the British imposed to contain it earned
no less resentment from Indians than the
piles of the dead. Clearly, Indians
wanted to speak out against British
policy, and in 1885, a group of Indian
intellectuals created a forum to do just
that with the foundation of the Indian
National Congress. The INC, or simply
Congress, became a forum and a focal
point for Indian rights advocates and
later the independence movement. It was
envisioned as a way for Indians from
every province and of every faith to
voice their views directly to the
British in a way that couldn't be
ignored. It embraced democracy, offering
provinces elected representatives to
stand for Congress and ensure their
voices were heard. Even Congress's
founders were surprised by its success.
From its 73 founding delegates in 1885,
in just 4 years, it grew to 2,000
delegates. It was a formidable showing
of Indian autonomy, and it quickly began
pressuring the British to listen. In
1892, the British made several
concessions to Congress's demands, such
as expanding access to the coveted civil
service examinations and opening some
positions in local councils to popular
elections. They were small steps, but
they were a start, and Congress's
founding proved to be a landmark moment
in the path to independence.
[Music]
By the late 19th century, an Indian
consciousness was clearly growing.
However, there were many issues and
divisions to be worked out among
Indians, and none proved more
troublesome than the relationship
between Hindus and Muslims. Tensions
between Hindus and Muslims were nothing
new. Even aside from the wars and
conquest, there had been episodes of
violence between Hindu locals and Muslim
traders since Muslims first arrived in
Indian ports. The intolerant policies of
the later Mughal Empire also alienated
Hindus and embittered the Hindu nobles
who took power as the empire declined.
The British also complicated matters.
Britain dealt with the divide between
Hindus and Muslims by establishing
separate systems of justice and applying
different laws to the different groups.
It was hoped that this would minimize
conflict, which it did in some ways, but
in others, it created a legal barrier
between Hindus and Muslims that only
encouraged their division. The British
were also generally more sympathetic to
the Muslims than the Hindus, and as a
result, Muslims were given preferential
treatment as soldiers and in the
fiercely contested civil service
positions open to Indians. The result
was that by the late 19th century,
Hindu-Muslim violence was becoming
common. For example, the Mappila Muslim
community in Southwest India launched no
fewer than six revolts between 1839 and
1921 over oppressive and discriminatory
treatment by Hindu landlords. Many of
the disputes were religious in nature.
For example, one riot in Bombay in 1851
erupted when a Parsi journal published
an image of the Prophet Muhammad,
resulting in attacks on Parsis by
Muslims in the city. The treatment of
cows was a particularly thorny issue
from the 1870s with Hindus taking issue
with Muslims killing and eating them.
The so-called cow protection movement
emerged to demand an end to the killing
and eating of cows, while Muslims took
this as an imposition of Hindu religion
upon their lives and an attack on Islam.
This resulted in deadly violence in the
last decades of the 19th century. In
1893 alone, some 100 people were killed
in violence over cow killing in the
Punjab, and several hundred more died in
rioting in Bombay over the same issue.
Nevertheless, Muslims helped to found
Congress and shared the desire for a
greater voice in governing India. But it
was apparent that Hindu and Muslim
interests were in conflict. Almost
immediately after its founding, Muslims
began abandoning Congress, and within 8
years of its existence, it lost half of
its original Muslim membership.
[Music]
With the dawn of the 20th century, there
was clearly an appetite for change in
India.
But it appeared that this appetite was
concentrated in an educated elite and
not the disinterested masses. Something
needed to happen to motivate the common
people to mobilize, and that thing would
be the Bengal Partition Plan.
In 1905, Britain proposed a plan to
partition Bengal and its almost 80
million people, merging Muslim East
Bengal with Assam and the Hindu West
with Bihar and Orissa. The British
believed it would make governance easier
and consolidate religious groups in the
same places.
Most Muslims welcomed the plan, but the
Hindu reaction was one of indignation.
Congress and other Indian leaders saw it
as an attack on Hindu autonomy and an
attempt at divide and rule across the
continent. The strength of the reaction
would catch everyone by surprise. Taking
advantage of a growing press and an
increasingly literate public, the
opposition movement to the partition
spread like wildfire. Lala Lajpat Rai,
Bal Gangadhar Tilak, and Bipin Chandra
Pal, affectionately known as Lal, Bal,
and Pal, became the figureheads of a
protest movement that spread across all
over India. With Congress's support, the
movement implemented a policy of
economic non-cooperation known as
Swadeshi. They told Indians to stop
buying British goods or foreign imports
and instead buy Indian. Indian shops
refused to stock imported goods, and
mobs gathered up foreign goods to burn
in bonfires. The results were felt in
the economy. By 1908, there had been a
25% decrease in imports. The Indians
understood how important trade and
wealth were to the British, and economic
resistance was the best way to strike at
them. Violence was rare, but when it
happened, it was used by the British to
condemn the whole movement. Bal was
deported to Mandalay in Burma in 1907.
Bal was arrested and put on trial in
connection with an attempted bomb attack
on British officials, an attack which he
certainly had no knowledge of beforehand
and was also deported to Burma.
Resistance continued in some form until
1912, when the British were forced to
withdraw the plan. They proposed a new
partition based on language, which did
little to please anyone, but it was less
despised than the original plan. Still,
in 1912, this unhappiness was expressed
in a bomb attack on the incoming Viceroy
Charles Hardinge that killed one of his
attendants. The Bengal Partition was a
tide shift in Indian history. For the
first time, a mass movement had animated
most of the population against British
power. The masses were not yet clamoring
for independence, but they had proven
willing to band together for change, and
they'd proven it could work. However,
the sharp divisions between Hindus and
Muslims expressed an irreconcilable rift
between the two on the future of India.
In 1913, the All India Muslim League was
founded as a Muslim alternative to
Congress, which would in time pave the
way for India's partition.
The First World War blindsided the
world, and India suffered its own issues
as a result.
Indians generally supported Britain
during the war, and some 1.5 million
Indians served in the military over the
course of the conflict. Simple loyalty,
steady pay, and the opportunity for
social advancement all helped explain
why men joined up to fight a war that
was far away from their home. Indian
troops served in virtually every theater
of the war, including France, Gallipoli,
and Egypt, but made their biggest mark
in Mesopotamia, where they comprised the
majority of British-aligned forces. Many
Indians distinguished themselves on the
battlefield. For example, Khudadad Khan
became the first Indian, although
technically today he would be counted as
Pakistani, to receive the Victoria Cross
for his valiant defense of a machine gun
position against a German assault in
Belgium in October 1914. The war has
complicated effects within India.
Wartime rises in taxes and prices caused
economic hardship, compounded by poor
weather which produced food shortages in
some areas. Other industries prospered,
namely steel and iron, who benefited
from higher demand to supply the war
effort. The sacrifices needed for the
war led Indians to question what it was
all for. Many Indians began to question
the British claims of fighting for
freedom and civilization when they did
not practice that freedom in India. In
1916, this feeling of dissatisfaction
led the Congress and the Muslim League
together to sign the Lucknow Agreement,
issuing a joint demand for expanded
democratic rights, minority protections,
and judicial independence for India.
This was followed by the foundation of
the Indian Home Rule League, spearheaded
by British-Irish activist Annie Besant,
which pushed for Indian autonomy. Over
60,000 Indians died in the fighting, but
even worse was the Spanish flu outbreak
immediately after, which killed around
14 million Indians, or about 5% of the
population.
[Music]
After the war, the appetite for reform
was stronger than ever, but India was
left disappointed with its options. The
Montford reforms of 1919 granted some
democratic concessions and expanded
Indian control of certain government
departments, like education and health,
but the British kept a firm grip on
justice and policing. But it was the
Rowlatt Act, which extended wartime
powers of trying political cases without
a jury, that provoked the strongest
opposition seen so far. Indian leaders
recognized that this law could be used
to crack down on independence
protesters, and they responded strongly.
Protests and strikes erupted across the
nation, which the British responded to
with force. Nowhere was this more
infamous than in Amritsar. Tensions were
high in the city after the national
protests and a heavily publicized attack
on European women in early April. In
defiance of British orders, on April
13th, thousands of people gathered in
the Jallianwala Bagh garden to celebrate
the religious festival of Baisakhi. The
British military commander in the city,
Brigadier General Reginald Dyer, was
outraged, and he'd make sure the Indians
were punished. At 5:30 that evening,
Dyer and 50 of his soldiers marched into
the garden plaza. Enclosed on three
sides by walls and buildings, his troops
blocked the only exit. Then, without a
single warning to disperse, Dyer ordered
his men to open fire. For the next 10
minutes, the soldiers unloaded every
last round of ammunition into the
terrified crowd. Many Indians fell to
the bullets, while others were crushed
to death. It was a ruthless, intentional
massacre, and when the smoke cleared, at
least 379 people were dead. Some
estimates put the death toll as high as
1,500.
News of the massacre spread like
wildfire. People across India were
horrified. Many of those who had
supported the British now turned against
them. In their attempts to suppress
protests, the British encouraged
countless people to stand with Congress
in demanding an end to British rule.
Even in Britain, the massacre was
fiercely condemned. Secretary of State
for War, Winston Churchill, called it
monstrous, and the House of Commons
voted 247 to 37 to condemn Dyer, but he
did not face any serious consequences.
Dyer himself was unapologetic, believing
until the day he died that he did the
right thing. He was not alone in that
belief, and he received more in
donations from supporters of his actions
than the families of the victims ever
did in compensation from the British
government. The Amritsar massacre was a
turning point for Indian independence.
Momentum moved decisively in favor of
independence, and as the British
imprisoned more and more protesters,
30,000 by the end of 1921 alone, calls
for independence grew, and many Indians
clamored for a leader to direct their
struggle. Fortunately, they had one.
Mahatma Gandhi was born to a Gujarati
merchant family in 1869.
At age 18, he traveled to London where
he studied law before moving to South
Africa in 1893.
South Africa was home to a large Indian
population, and Gandhi spent the next 22
years of his life there. Gandhi's
experiences in South Africa permanently
shaped him. He became a devout Hindu,
and he saw firsthand the sharp
differences in treatment between racial
groups there. Gandhi also served in a
medical capacity in the Second Boer War
from 1899 to 1902, which exposed him to
the horrors of violence in war. Gandhi
became a community leader and an
activist, leading nonviolent campaigns
by the 1910s, and was arrested in 1913
for leading a great march across South
Africa in protest against British
colonial policy. Gandhi swore by a
nonviolent resistance tactic he called
Satyagraha, which absolutely prohibited
violence and called for noncooperation
with discriminatory and oppressive
policies. In this way, Gandhi hoped to
maintain the moral high ground over the
British, while also treating them with
respect and gentleness. He returned to
India in 1915, already famous as an
activist, and amassed a rapid following
for his advocacy against British
imperialism and support for the Home
Rule Movement. In the wake of the
Amritsar massacre, he was swept into
leadership of the INC and pushed it in a
more firmly pro-independence direction.
Naturally, this angered the British, who
arrested him and dozens of other INC
leaders in 1922 and sentenced him to 6
years in prison. Following his release
from prison, Gandhi found the
independence movement bitterly split
over its goals and methods.
Disheartened and unable to unite them,
Gandhi pivoted to anti-poverty work and
left the political arena for several
years.
[Music]
In his absence, the independence
movement continued to take shape, albeit
one Gandhi was not fully happy with. The
British were forced to hand over more
concessions, unable to stem the rising
tide for independence. In 1921, India
got a bicameral elected parliament and
greater financial control over Indian
affairs through a tariff board. The
British finally agreed to Indian demands
to have civil service exams in India,
ending the requirement for Indians to
take lengthy and expensive trips to
England in hopes of advancing their
careers. Another formative moment
arrived in 1928
when the British set up the Simon
Commission to review governance in
India. The Indians were rightly insulted
that the commission didn't include any
Indians, and both Congress and the
Muslim League protested it. Congress set
up its own commission and reached its
own conclusions, demanding a
self-governing India with Commonwealth
status. Hot on the heels of this demand
in 1929, Congress elected a new leader,
a rising star of the nationalist
movement named Jawaharlal Nehru. Nehru's
father, Motilal, was also a leading
Congress figure, but his declining
health in his old age cleared the way
for his son to take over the family
dynasty. With Nehru's election,
Congress's demands changed. On December
19th, 1929, Congress issued a call for
nothing short of full independence for
India. The Muslim League was not yet
ready for such a demand. They were still
hoping for a self-governing Muslim
constituency within the British Empire,
but soon enough, they would become bold
enough to call for a fully independent
state, too. In 1933, during a meeting
with British officials in London, a
pamphlet was circulated among League
members calling for the establishment of
a fully independent Muslim nation in
India, uniting the Punjab, Afghan,
Kashmir, Sindh, and Balochistan into
what they called Pakistan. The British
continued to drag their feet, but with
the vision of independence clarifying
across India, they were now acting
mostly in denial. More reforms came in
1935, establishing representative
provincial governments with separate
Hindu and Muslim electorates. But
Congress's landslide victory came with
the resounding cry that this was simply
not enough. Only independence would
satisfy India.
[Music]
In 1929, the depression hit India hard
and had an indirect effect on the fight
for independence. India has been a major
exporter of food and other resources,
but that depression caused a collapse of
the export economy as the global market
shrank. Foreign investment dried up,
grain production plummeted, and many
families were hit with poverty and an
inability to pay their taxes.
Agriculture struggled, and India found
itself in the unprecedented position of
having to import a large amount of its
food. On the other hand, the lack of
foreign investment allowed Indian
investors to invest in the industries
that weathered the depression, such as
textiles. Many of these Indian investors
were also supporters of Congress, who
funneled their newfound wealth into
opposition to the British. Amidst this
difficulty, the British passed a salt
tax that required Indians to pay the
British exorbitant fees for use of the
basic resources. This included even the
act of boiling seawater to extract the
salt. These taxes, naturally, fell
hardest on the poor and was enough to
bring Gandhi fully back into the
independence fight. With the support of
Nehru and Congress, Gandhi led a
national protest against the move. For
24 days, Gandhi and his supporters
undertook a peaceful 240-mi walk from
Sabarmati to Dandi on the Gujarat coast
in protest at the absurd laws. Global
media attention was captured by the
march. Upon reaching his destination on
April 5th, Gandhi scooped up a pile of
mud and salt and said, "With this, I am
shaking the foundations of the British
Empire." The simple act was powerful and
easy to emulate. Millions across India
followed his lead, and it became one of
the most iconic moments of the
independence struggle. The British
responded forcefully, arresting some
60,000 people in association with the
salt march and the wider non-cooperation
movement it encouraged. Although Gandhi
once again pivoted towards poverty and
social inequality after 1934,
the independence movement continued
strong without him, simmering away for
the rest of the 1930s, proving that it
would stand strong no matter how much
the British wanted to defy it.
Unfortunately, the Second World War
arrived to throw a wrench in global
affairs.
India was informed of its involvement in
the war on September 1st, 1939.
It was a decision made by the British
government, not Indians themselves. But,
the Indian people broadly agreed with
the Allied cause, especially against the
Japanese, whose assault through East and
Southeast Asia would be infamously
brutal. Indian soldiers once again
served a vital role in the Allied war
effort, with some 1.4 million Indians
serving on the battlefields from North
Africa to Burma. Naturally, most Indian
troops were tasked with the war in
Southeast Asia. Indian troops formed the
backbone of the desperate British
defenses of Hong Kong, Singapore, and
Burma, among others. And as a result,
many fell into the hands of the
Japanese. Domestically, the war caused
great tension between the British and
Congress. Congress supported the war,
but in exchange, they wanted concessions
that the British were unwilling to give.
In October 1939, the British High
Command executed wartime powers to force
provincial Congress representatives to
resign. An attempt by the renowned
diplomat Sir Stafford Cripps, who was a
good friend of Nehru's, to negotiate a
position for Congress leaders in a sort
of wartime cabinet for India fell
through. And Indians were left alienated
from leadership throughout the war.
Gandhi led the call for nonviolent
resistance to Britain's heavy-handed
policy and led the Quit India Movement
in 1942.
The British responded by arresting him,
the entire Congress leadership, and some
90,000 supporters over the course of the
war. This infuriated many, and some of
the Quit India protests became more
aggressive, with sabotage of public
infrastructure and occasional riots.
Gandhi was released in 1944 and
continued the Quit India campaign for
the rest of the war. There were those in
India who sought a very different path
and saw the war as a chance for
independence from another angle. One of
those was Subhas Chandra Bose, who
stands as one of the most complicated
figures in the story of Indian
independence. Bose threw his support
behind Hitler and the Axis, believing
that India might achieve independence by
having the British be defeated by the
Axis. Bose traveled to Germany, where he
met with Nazi leaders and spent several
years building an alliance. Hitler even
agreed to allow an Indian division into
the SS, and this Tiger Legion would gain
several thousand members. In 1943, as
the war in Europe turned against
Germany, Bose traveled to Indonesia and
cozied up to the Japanese instead. Bose
ended up recruiting some of the Indian
prisoners of war in Southeast Asia to
serve in an anti-British Indian National
Army. In March 1943, this army
collaborated with the Japanese to invade
India in the often-forgotten Operation
U-Go. The invasion lasted several
months, but the Indian people did not
rise to support them as Bose had hoped.
Instead, Indian and British troops
mounted a fierce defense of India,
earning two hard-fought victories at the
battles of Kohima and Imphal that proved
to be Japan's most costly defeats thus
far and spelled an end to Japanese
expansion in the Southeast Asian
theater.
[Music]
But if war and political unrest weren't
enough, India was struck with yet
another crisis in the 1943 Bengal
famine.
India had partially relied on food
imports before the war, but Japanese
control of Southeast Asia, especially
Burma, put India on the brink of a food
crisis. By 1943, food shortages were
becoming a serious issue in many parts
of India. Britain mostly took an
interventionist approach to the famine,
cracking down on hoarding and
instituting rationing across most of
India. Bengal was the exception to this.
There, the government took a
non-interventionist approach, hoping the
problem would resolve itself. This
strategy, or lack thereof, was a
colossal failure. By the time the
British viceroy had deployed troops to
Bengal to override the local government
and distribute grain, a million people
had starved to death. The response from
the British government has been fiercely
criticized ever since. Critics have
charged the British with neglecting to
help India and intentionally or
negligently allowing the famine to
continue. Defenders of British actions
counter that, in fact, some 1 million
tons of food was shipped to India during
the famine. Churchill had wanted to ship
more and sought help from the Americans
to do that, but they simply lacked the
ships and manpower to do so. Japanese
dominance in Southeast Asia made the
prospect of shipping food to the region
a dangerous prospect, more likely to
result in sunken ships and dead sailors
than famine relief.
But the inability of the British to help
India only proved the point that Indian
independence advocates had made. If
Britain was unable to meet the
challenges of controlling India, then it
had no business trying to do so.
[Music]
[Applause]
When the war ended in 1945, the world
and India were a very different place.
It was impossible now to deny the
overwhelming demands for independence.
Congress swept over 90% of the
non-Muslim seats in the first post-war
elections, and the Muslim League took a
similar 90% share of the Muslim ones.
Meanwhile, in Britain, the war had
destroyed both Britain's ability and
desire to hold an empire abroad. Almost
immediately after the war, the British
announced their intention to leave
India, and in February 1947, set a
provisional date of June 1947 for their
withdrawal, later pushed back to August.
The issue now was how to conduct that
withdrawal. There were some, like
Gandhi, who favored a unified India with
all of the territories of the British
Raj handed over to Indian rule in one
piece. In reality, there was no other
option than partition between Hindu and
Muslim. Calls from Sikhs to receive an
independent nation in the Punjab were
rejected. On June 2nd, 1947,
representatives from Congress, the
Muslim League, the Sikh community, and
the British agreed on an outline plan to
create two nations. Hindu-majority areas
were easy to mark out, comprising most
of the subcontinent, while the Muslim
areas to be made into Pakistan were more
awkward. Pakistan would have to be two,
West Pakistan, comprising Sind and
Punjab, Kashmir, the Northwest Frontier
Province, and Baluchistan, with East
Pakistan, comprising the Muslim-majority
areas of Bengal. The numerous princely
states within India were allowed to pick
their own fates, and virtually all of
them agreed to hand over their territory
to the new Republic of India. Still, the
borders of this new India were still in
flux as independence approached. In
fact, the final borders of India and
Pakistan were not agreed until the first
week of August, barely a week before
independence, and were not formally
announced until the morning of
Wednesday, August 14th, 1947,
the same day that Pakistan declared its
independence. Rushed and problematic the
partition would prove, but for many
Indians, it was easy to put out of mind
as the promise of independence was
finally realized. Shortly before
midnight on the night of August 14th,
Jawaharlal Nehru ascended the steps of
the Parliament House to address his
nation and the world. As midnight
ushered in August 15th, 1947, India
enjoyed independence for the first time
in centuries. The legacy of its
subjugation had left it many problems to
fix, and it would find plenty of new
problems to come, but it would face
those problems standing on its own two
feet, with a government drawn from its
own people, striving to serve its own
people, and hearkening to the voice of
its own people.
[Music]
India now faced a monumental task to
establish a country that could
successfully manage the numerous
languages, faiths, and cultural
identities within its borders, while
navigating a world of bitter political
divides and ideological hostility, where
one wrong move could trigger a war that
could wipe out nations in moments.
The first issue facing India was the
partition itself. The complexity of
Indian geography and the imprecision of
the border divisions meant that millions
found themselves on the wrong side of
the border. There were Hindus in
Pakistan, Muslims in India, and
religious minorities in both who were
not happy with where they ended up. What
followed was one of the largest mass
migrations in history, with around 15
million people moving across India and
Pakistan. The governments of India and
Pakistan were not prepared, nor had they
expected such a colossal migration.
There was little government support for
migrants, which left families and
communities alone to organize the
complex upheaval of their lives.
Supplies of food and water weren't
capable of handling the movement of
people. Inevitably, hundreds of
thousands died. Dehydration, starvation,
exhaustion, exposure, and disease
claimed countless victims. Tensions and
violence between religious groups was
both a cause and a product of this
migration. Migrant convoys were
attacked, sexual violence was rampant,
and mob killings were widespread. To
take a few examples, on September 22nd,
1947, some 3,000 Muslims were murdered
in Amritsar by a mob of Sikhs. They
opened fire on the train with rifles and
then swept through the carriages with
swords and knives to finish off the
rest. On January 12th, 1948, the tables
were flipped in Gujarat, Pakistan, where
around 1,500 Hindus and Sikhs were
massacred when their train was attacked
by a Muslim mob. Most of the migration
and violence occurred in Bengal, the
Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir, which had
long been the most religiously diverse
areas of India. The scale of the
migration in these places can be seen
through statistics. In 1931, the
Indian-controlled Punjab was 30% Muslim,
but less than 2% in 1951. In
Pakistani-controlled Punjab, 22% of
people were Hindus or Sikhs in 1931, but
just 0.16%
were in 1951.
Overall, it is estimated that over 1
million died as a result of the
migrations or the violence that came
with them.
[Music]
Kashmir proved a particularly difficult
area to handle amidst the partition.
Alongside the refugee crisis, the
Maharaja of the princely state of Jammu
and Kashmir, Hari Singh, had not settled
on joining either India or Pakistan
during the partition process. Singh's
rule and that of his forefathers had
fallen hard upon the Muslim Kashmiris.
With the advent of partition, many
Muslims in Kashmir jumped at the chance
to overthrow him and join Pakistan. In
June 1947, a major rebellion broke out
in Poonch, spearheaded by Kashmiri
veterans who had served in the war and
who wanted to join with Pakistan. This
rebellion escalated over the summer and
into autumn until Pakistani troops
intervened to support the rebels in
October. Singh turned to India for help,
offering to join India in exchange for
military support. India agreed and
immediately sent troops in to repel the
Pakistanis. The initiative remained with
Pakistan through to November, though,
with Pakistan successfully capturing
Mirpur, where some estimates claim
thousands of non-Muslims were killed by
Pakistani forces. By early 1948, India
gained the advantage and had launched
Operation Victory to drive the
Pakistanis back. The war was mostly
fought as a series of small skirmishes
rather than pitched battles, and the
front line stabilized through 1948,
where it remained largely static for the
rest of the war.
Eventually, the UN brokered a cease-fire
that came into effect on January 1st,
1949. A temporary border was drawn at
the Line of Control, leaving about 2/3
of Kashmir in Indian hands and 1/3 in
Pakistani hands. The plan was to hold a
referendum to let the people of Kashmir
decide their fate, but the two sides
could never agree on proper terms, and
such a referendum never came. The Line
of Control is now effectively a
permanent border between India and
Pakistan, with only minor changes since
1949.
The First Kashmir War, also called the
First Indo-Pakistani War, was a sour
beginning to the relations between the
newly independent nations. Perhaps such
conflict was inevitable, given the deep
divides that emerged before
independence. It was far from the last
war between the two, not even the last
over Kashmir, and set the tone for
Indian-Pakistani relations thereafter.
The relationship between them remains
one of the most difficult and
potentially dangerous ones in world
diplomacy.
[Music]
The conflict was a bitter pill to
swallow for the many Indians who had
once dreamed of unification, not least
of all, Gandhi. After independence,
Gandhi continued to work to heal
relations between Hindus and Muslims. He
was pursuing this goal when he traveled
to Delhi in January 1948 to deliver
speeches and conduct prayer meetings to
bring the two faiths together. However,
one Nathuram Godse believed that such
behavior was a betrayal of Hindus. On
the evening of January 30th, he leapt
from the crowd walked to a prayer
meeting and fired three shots that
fatally wounded him.
The death of Gandhi was a sudden and
brutal blow to the country. Nehru
broadcast to the nation telling them,
"Friends and comrades, the light has
gone out of our lives, and there is
darkness everywhere, and I don't quite
know what to tell you or how to say it."
Gandhi's death provoked riots across the
country, and his assassin was hanged.
However, his death could not totally
overshadow the opening of a new chapter
in Indian history. It had been a long
road, and the destination wasn't quite
what many hoped, but Gandhi had lived to
see an independent India, ruled by its
own people for the first time in
centuries.
[Music]
India's new constitution came into force
on January 26th, 1950, and outlined the
vision of the country and how it planned
to tackle the problems it faced.
Firstly, India would be a democracy with
voting rights extended to all citizens
above 21, and protections for freedom of
speech, association, and political
affiliation.
The Lok Sabha, People's Assembly, and
the Rajya Sabha, States Assembly, form
the two houses of India's legislature,
while executive power was wielded by the
Prime Minister. Jawaharlal Nehru and his
Congress Party won the first elections
in a landslide.
Secondly, the Indian government was to
be secular. Given India's rich religious
diversity, staking the government in any
one faith would lead to conflict. People
of all faiths were entitled to the same
protections, privileges, and rights as
anyone else. A similar view was taken
towards language. While Hindi would be
the predominant language, other
languages like Bengali, Tamil, and
Marathi were similarly protected and
endorsed for official use in areas of
the country that favored them. India's
linguistic differences heavily informed
the initial division of India's states.
Protections were also given towards two
groups historically discriminated
against, the so-called Scheduled Castes,
untouchables, and the Scheduled Tribes,
adivasis. The legal category of
untouchable was officially abolished,
and reservations were set aside in a
range of areas from university places to
legislative seats to
for Scheduled Tribes and Castes. Much
like affirmative action in the United
States, India believed that positive
discrimination in favor of historically
mistreated groups could help address the
consequences of that mistreatment.
Jawaharlal Nehru continued to lead India
through its early years of independence
and played a vital role in shaping his
country. Economically, Nehru was a
socialist, though not a full-on
communist, and favored state direction
of the economy rather than relying on
the market. His economic policy was
based around five-year plans that
directed government investment in
particular industries and involved some
nationalization. Nehru was something of
a moderate, though, and often
disappointed India's more left-wing
forces by not nationalizing more
industries or clamping down harder on
private business. Ultimately, his
economic approach seemed to work, and
India enjoyed incredible growth and
recovery in the postwar years.
By 1965, India had the seventh highest
industrial output in the world, and per
capita GDP greatly increased, although
it still remained far below that of
Western nations.
Socially, Nehru's term saw many reforms
that expanded minority and women's
rights.
His government ended caste restrictions
on marriage, raised the minimum marriage
age, and expanded women's inheritance
rights.
Education also improved markedly in the
1950s and '70s with thousands of new
schools and universities. In 1950, 23
Indian Institutes of Technology were
established to provide high-quality
education in their fields, and they
remain some of the most successful and
respected educational institutions in
India. In foreign policy, India walked a
path of careful neutrality. While
Nehru's socialist economic leanings
inclined it towards the USSR, India was
keen to maintain diplomatic and economic
relations with the West, and as a
result, became a pillar of the global
non-aligned movement. Still, this
neutrality didn't prevent India getting
into disputes. In 1961, tensions reached
their height between India and Portugal.
Portugal had kept control of Goa since
the 16th century and had refused to cede
its control at Indian independence.
Attempts to resolve the issue
diplomatically failed, and in December
1961,
India launched Operation Vijay, victory,
to retake it by force. 50 people were
killed in 2 days of fighting before
India successfully annexed Goa. The war
achieved its aims, but was sharply
criticized in the West as an
unnecessarily aggressive move that
compromised India's carefully practiced
neutrality.
India also found itself at odds with
communist China on several issues. In
1959, they offered sanctuary to the
Dalai Lama following the brutal Chinese
response to the Tibetan uprising, which
angered Beijing. Meanwhile, the two
countries had ongoing border disputes
over control of the Aksai Chin and
Arunachal Pradesh regions, which boiled
over into war in October 1962.
The Sino-Indian War lasted a month and
claimed 2,000 lives, mostly Indian, and
China successfully seized most of the
territory it wanted. India agreed to a
cease-fire on November 21st in what was
clearly a defeat.
[Music]
Nehru suddenly had a heart attack in
1964.
After a brief 2-year term for Lal
Bahadur Shastri, who also died suddenly
of a heart attack, the office of Prime
Minister fell to Nehru's daughter,
Indira Gandhi. Indira Gandhi, no
relation to Mahatma, symbolized the
dominance of the Gandhi-Nehru political
dynasty started by her grandfather. She
took power in 1966 and proved to be one
of India's most significant and divisive
leaders. She was a talented and ruthless
politician, but was accused of nepotism,
corruption, and dictatorial tendencies
during their term. In some ways, she was
very successful. She presided over a
green revolution that modernized Indian
agriculture and made India the world's
sixth nuclear state in 1974.
Arguably, her most famous act was her
intervention in the Bangladesh War of
Independence in 1971.
Discrimination against Bengalis in what
was then East Pakistan by the Urdu
majority of West Pakistan led the modern
nation of Bangladesh to assert its
independence that year. Pakistan
responded harshly with a wave of
violence that was widely considered to
be a genocide. Indira was a staunch
supporter of Bangladesh and fierce
critic of Pakistan. She brought global
attention to the conflict and pressured
the US to cut off military aid to
Pakistan. On December 3rd, 1971,
Pakistan launched military strikes on
India claiming they were preemptive
attacks against a planned Indian
invasion. India responded with a
lightning campaign of air and naval
strikes which crippled the Pakistani
military and sent its troops into
Bangladesh to help the rebels. By
December 17th, Pakistan was defeated and
forced to submit to a cease-fire, ending
both the third Indo-Pakistani War, the
Bangladeshi genocide, and Bangladesh's
bloody struggle for independence.
On the other hand, Indira's nepotism,
which saw her promote her sons Sanjay
and Rajiv to high positions in
government, was a permanent blot on her
record. Worse were the allegations of
corruption and her response to them. In
1975, she was found guilty of election
manipulation and ordered to leave
office, but she defied the court and
declared a state of emergency to stay in
power. She used her new-found powers to
pass sweeping censorship of the media
and purged government and party
officials to replace them with her
loyalists. This state of emergency
effectively made Indira Gandhi a
dictator, albeit one with popular
support, and was kept for almost 2
years. Months of rule by decrees,
coupled with economic issues like
inflation, eventually undermined her
support. When she finally called another
election in 1977,
Indira and Congress were swept out of
office by the Janata Party.
The Janata Party struggled to deal with
India's problems. Prime Minister Morarji
Desai was a capable diplomat and a
respected man, but he was not able to
navigate the personal and political
rivalries of his government, and it
collapsed in July 1979.
Desai was replaced with Charan Singh,
who lasted just 23 days in office before
his government collapsed, too.
When elections were held again in
January 1980, Indians turned back to the
promised stability of Indira Gandhi.
However, the days of her dynasty were
numbered. A few months after returning
to power, her eldest son, Sanjay, died
in a plane crash,
eliminating the planned heir to their
political dynasty.
But the death knell for Indira Gandhi's
reign and life would be rung in the
Punjab with Operation Blue Star. While
Sikhs mostly accepted their status in
India, there was and remains a powerful
faction of Sikh separatists calling for
an independent Sikh state in the Punjab.
In 1984, Indira's government was
informed by the USSR that the US and
Pakistan were supporting Sikh
separatists preparing to launch a
rebellion.
Allegations that are now understood to
have been false. Indira moved
preemptively launching Operation Blue
Star to crack down on Sikh groups in the
region. She sent troops and tanks
against the revered Golden Temple in
Amritsar, one of the holiest sites in
Sikhism, in a week-long street battle
with Sikh dissidents. Hundreds died on
both sides, and Sikhs across India and
the world were outraged. This outrage
found a deadly outlet on October 31st,
1984, when two of Indira Gandhi's Sikh
bodyguards assassinated her in her
garden as she headed to a TV interview.
Her death shocked India, provoking riots
and anti-Sikh violence that killed
hundreds. After her death, her son,
Rajiv, was ushered into power. During
his 5-year tenure, Rajiv presided over
economic renewal and several regional
insurgencies, most notably among Sikhs
in the Punjab and separatists in Assam.
India also responded to an appeal from
Sri Lanka to send troops to quell the
Tamil Tigers on the island from 1987 to
1990, which India feared might encourage
Tamil separatism on the mainland. This,
however, proved to be the undoing of the
dynasty. Rajiv was voted out of office
in 1989, replaced by Vishwanath Singh,
but Rajiv hoped to echo his mother by
returning to power in a few years.
However, on May 21st, 1991, Rajiv was
assassinated by a suicide bomber on the
campaign trail near Chennai. The
attacker was a supporter of the Tamil
Tigers who opposed Rajiv's suggestions
that India return to finish off the
Tigers. Rajiv's death brought an end to
the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty that had led
India for 40 of its 44 years of
independence.
But as India marched towards the 21st
century, things were clearly improving
in virtually every area. Through the
1980s, India imported technology and
goods such as televisions and computers
that rapidly modernized the country.
Agriculture improved with farming
technology and fertilizer banishing the
famines that had haunted India for
centuries. Urbanization accelerated
rapidly, and one in four Indians lived
in cities by the turn of the millennium.
All these imports caused an imbalance of
trade which reached a crisis point in
1991, forcing a readjustment towards a
more liberal economic approach. India
opened itself up to more foreign
investment, rolled back regulations, and
scaled back government control of the
economy. Per capita GDP rose sharply
over the following years, rising almost
50% between 1990 and 2000 and continuing
a meteoric rise after 2000. It was also
a period of political diversity as
Congress lost its traditional dominance
over politics and new parties,
especially the nationalist Bharatiya
Janata Party, BJP, emerged to shape
politics. India saw a period of
coalition governments that continued
until 2014 with several short-lived
prime ministers failing to serve out
their full terms as alliances shifted
and collapsed.
A modernizing society and economy did
not mean an end to old rivalries.
Relations with Pakistan continued to be
difficult despite attempts to improve
them. In 1999, the two nations fought
their fourth war, known as the Kargil
War, after Pakistani soldiers crossed
the Indian LOC in Kashmir. Stakes were
higher than ever since Pakistan had
acquired nuclear weapons back in 1974.
But after 12 weeks of fighting and some
1,000 to 4,000 dead across both sides,
India came out victorious and the two
powers resumed an uneasy peace.
[Music]
India entered the new millennium
stronger and more numerous than ever
before.
On May 11th, 2000, Asta Aurora became
India's billionth person and the
population has continued to rise.
Since then, India has faced down many of
the same challenges that have plagued
the rest of the world. The challenges of
climate hit India hard in 2004 with the
Boxing Day tsunami, which killed an
estimated 16,000 people in Southeast
India, alongside around 20,000 more
across Southeast Asia. Floods have
continued to pose a challenge, such as
in 2013 where some 6,000 lost their
lives to flooding across northern India,
as have earthquakes, like the 2001
Gujarat quake that claimed 20,000 lives.
India has been on the front line of the
war on terror, facing numerous deadly
terrorist attacks through the 2000s.
Mumbai suffered especially hard with 200
people being killed in a train bombing
in 2006 and another 175 slain in a mass
shooting in 2008.
The government has also contended with
homegrown insurgencies, namely the
Naxalite Maoist communists who have been
operating in areas of Eastern India,
committing violent attacks on civilians,
soldiers, and politicians that have
claimed hundreds of lives. Economically,
India joined most of the world in a
steep recession in 2008, but close trade
with China, which also weathered the
crisis better than much of the world,
and less risky lending practices from
Indian banks meant India bounced back
faster than most countries. What was a
year-spanning crisis for most ended up
being a brief disruption to an otherwise
steady growth for India's economy. India
has been especially successful when it
comes to technology. Indian universities
are among the most productive in the
world for graduates in science,
technology, and engineering, and Indian
graduates in these fields have an
international reputation that has led to
comparatively higher representation of
Indians in the tech industry in places
like Silicon Valley. Few developments in
Indian technology have been quite as
talked about as its space program. In
2013, they successfully put a probe in
orbit around Mars. And in 2023, achieved
their first successful landing on the
moon.
[Music]
In 2014, India opened a new chapter
under Narendra Modi and his BJP. Forming
the first non-coalition government in 30
years, Modi has earned enthusiastic
supporters and bitter enemies. To his
supporters, he is a strong leader
capable of decisive action for India's
best interests. To his critics, he is an
authoritarian whose nationalist
blustering is a danger to India's
minorities and the world peace.
Economically, Modi embraces a globalist
economic perspective with active
participation in global trade and
investment. Many credit him with India's
continued rise, with India overtaking
the UK in 2022 to become the world's
fifth largest economy. Others lament the
rising social and economic inequality of
modern India that has accompanied this
rise. Socially, Modi has revived the
Hindutva national ideology that
emphasizes India's Hindu heritage. A
celebration of India's treasured past it
may be, but one that leaves little place
for Muslims, Sikhs, or others who do not
share this faith. Diplomatically, he has
navigated a fraying global order,
keeping strong ties with the US and
European countries,
and with the BRICS economies, of which
it is a founding member. However, the
ever-present with Pakistan and
unresolved issues with China continue to
be delicate issues. It's far too early
to judge Modi with any objectivity, and
his time leading India doesn't look to
be ending anytime soon.
[Music]
In March 2024, India overtook China to
become the world's most populous nation.
Never in human history have so many
people rallied under the same flag. With
such a huge nation comes huge
opportunities, and most analysts expect
India to keep growing economically,
culturally, and politically, with many
predicting that it might be a superpower
on par with China or the US by the end
of the century. But with that also comes
huge problems. The logistics of feeding,
housing, caring, and representing its
massive population is a task that will
make or break India, and navigating the
deep divisions at home and abroad will
take all of India's effort. Looking back
on India's history, though, many of its
strengths and weaknesses are ones it's
dealt with for millennia. On January
22nd, 2024, Prime Minister Modi presided
over the inauguration of a temple to
Ram, or Rama, in Ayodhya. According to
the Ramayana, the divine hero was born
on that exact spot, and its opening was
a celebration for Hindus and a major
occasion for subscribers to Modi's
Hindutva ideology. The event captured
many of the themes we've seen throughout
Indian history. On its face, it
symbolized the power of Hinduism and of
the Sanskrit texts that continue to be
revered in India as strongly as they've
ever been.
Modi's participation in the ceremony can
be seen as a modern iteration of the
ancient tradition of leaders supporting
temples during their reign.
But there was also the shadow of
violence and division over the ceremony.
The Babri Masjid mosque had once stood
on the site, built by the Mughals in
1528,
and burned by Hindu radicals, some
linked to the BJP, in 1992. The specter
of religious violence and foreign
conquest of India therefore lingered in
the background of the day's events and
was much discussed by Modi's opponents
across news and social media.
One can look at India's history to find
parallels. Is the opening of the temple
another entry in a long and proud list
of Indian achievements, a symbol of both
faith and political power, an expression
of a new golden age like those
attributed to the Mauryans, the Guptas,
or the Mughals? Or will Modi's favoring
of one faith, one group, one people in
India's rich tapestry take modern India
down the path that it has so often
walked before, of division and eventual
collapse like that of the Bahmani, the
Mughals, or the British?
Failing to manage the diversity of India
has shed plenty of blood and toppled
many empires that have stood for far
longer than the relatively young nation
that has yet to see its 80th birthday.
And there is always the concern that, as
the world order shifts once more, the
new global hegemons might try to plunder
India's wealth for their own gain as so
many empires before them have tried. But
for all the similarities with the past,
it is easy to forget what has changed.
India has never been more unified, more
numerous, more advanced, more wealthy,
or more powerful than it is today. To
quote Modi speaking at the opening of
the Ram temple, "The weight of centuries
has come to an end. Now, what lies
ahead?" It's anyone's guess, but
whatever challenges await it, India has
never been in a stronger position to
meet them.